Title: 2025.findings-acl.929.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.929.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 16 Jul 2025 13:58:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 18085–18096 July 27 - August 1, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

# FactLens: Benchmarking Fine-Grained Fact Verification 

Kushan Mitra 

Megagon Labs, USA 

kushan@megagon.ai 

Dan Zhang 

Megagon Labs, USA 

dan_z@megagon.ai 

Sajjadur Rahman *

Adobe Inc. 

sajjadurr@adobe.com 

Estevam Hruschka 

Megagon Labs, USA 

estevam@megagon.ai 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive capability in language generation and understanding, but their tendency to hallu-cinate and produce factually incorrect infor-mation remains a key limitation. To verify LLM-generated contents and claims from other sources, traditional verification approaches of-ten rely on holistic models that assign a single factuality label to complex claims, potentially obscuring nuanced errors. In this paper, we advocate for a shift towards fine-grained verifi-cation, where complex claims are broken down into smaller sub-claims for individual verifica-tion, allowing for more precise identification of inaccuracies, improved transparency, and reduced ambiguity in evidence retrieval. How-ever, generating sub-claims poses challenges, such as maintaining context and ensuring se-mantic equivalence with respect to the origi-nal claim. We introduce FactLens 1 , a bench-mark for evaluating fine-grained fact verifica-tion, with metrics and automated evaluators of sub-claim quality. The benchmark data is manually curated to ensure high-quality ground truth. Our results show alignment between au-tomated FactLens evaluators and human judg-ments, and we discuss the impact of sub-claim characteristics on the overall verification per-formance. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have proven to be powerful tools, demonstrating impressive capa-bilities in language generation and understanding (Touvron et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020). How-ever, a well-known limitation of LLMs is their ten-dency to hallucinate, generating information that is factually incorrect or unsupported by evidence (Ji et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022). As LLMs become more widespread, especially in applications where 

> *Work done while at Megagon Labs.
> 1https://github.com/megagonlabs/factlens

factual accuracy is crucial, there has been increas-ing research on methods to verify the factuality of LLM-generated content as well as claims from other sources. Previous works on building fact-checking bench-marks focus on generating claims with a ground truth label , and in some cases provide the 

evidence/context to verify the claim (Aly et al., 2021; Schlichtkrull et al., 2024). Claims are gen-erated using human annotators (Aly et al., 2021), synthetic processes (Fatahi Bayat et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024a), or considering LLM outputs on Question-Answering tasks (Wang et al., 2024). To increase the complexity of the fact-checking pro-cess, the claims are generated from source data of multiple domains & modalities, such as Wikipedia text and/or tables (Thorne et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Aly et al., 2021), Web Pages (Schlichtkrull et al., 2024), Knowledge Graphs (Kim et al., 2023), online posts/chats (Wang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), and QA tasks from various domains such as statistics, finance, legal, etc (Jacovi et al., 2024). These works also provide baseline fact-checking pipelines, which typically involves two main stages: (1) the retrieval of relevant evidence using Search APIs and multimodal data-lakes (Tang et al., 2024b; Schlichtkrull et al., 2024) and (2) the verification of claims based on that evidence using NLI-based, LLM-based and fine-tuned fact-verification models (Li et al., 2024). Some works also explore dele-gating these steps entirely to an LLM-based policy framework (Li et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2023). Despite this structured pipeline, most existing methods rely on a holistic verification model, where complex claims are assigned a single factual-ity label, often obscuring the nuanced nature of the errors or inaccuracies in the claims. In this work, we echo the sentiments of Wang et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2020); Pan et al. (2023); Min et al. (2023); Si et al. (2024) for a shift towards fine-grained verifi-cation of complex claims, where claims are decom-

18085 posed into smaller, more manageable sub-claims that can be individually verified. We additionally emphasise on the need to provide evaluation met-rics to benchmark such fine-grained verification, and enrich existing benchmarks with fine-grained verification labels. As shown in Figure 1, the benefits of fine-grained verification are substantial. By breaking down a complex claim into its constituent sub-claims, verification is more precise, allowing for pinpointing exact locations of factual inaccuracies. Additionally, this approach enables more transpar-ent rationalizations and explanations, as each sub-claim can be linked directly to its corresponding evidence or lack thereof. Fine-grained decomposi-tion also narrows the scope of evidence retrieval, making the subsequent verification process more focused and less prone to ambiguity. Achieving fine-grained verification, however, presents its own challenges. Decomposing a raw, complex claim into smaller sub-claims is not sim-ply a matter of splitting it into sentences. Poorly constructed sub-claims can introduce a variety of issues: they may lose the context necessary for proper verification, lack atomicity, or misrepresent the original information by either omitting key de-tails or introducing new fabricated ones. Ensuring the quality and verifiability of these sub-claims is, therefore, critical for the overall success of the ver-ification process. To address these challenges, we introduce FactLens, a benchmark designed specifically for fine-grained fact verification. FactLens provides a novel suite of metrics for evaluating the quality of sub-claim generation and incorporates automated evaluators that combine LLM-based assessments with statistical metrics. The dataset has been man-ually curated to ensure high-quality sub-claims. Through empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that our sub-claim evaluators align closely with hu-man judgments. Moreover, our end-to-end evalua-tion shows that these fine-grained scores correlate strongly with improved downstream verification performance. We also present the results of state-of-the-art models on sub-claim generation, reveal-ing the challenges inherent in this task and the need for further research in this area. 

2 Evaluating Sub-claims with FactLens 

At the core of fine-grained verification is the de-composition of complex claims into smaller, more The IOC is responsible for organizing    

> the Summer Olympics.
> The IOC is responsible for organizing
> the Paralympic Games.
> The IOC was founded in 1894.
> The IOC is based in Lausanne,
> Switzerland.
> TRUE
> FactLens Evaluator
> TRUE
> FALSE
> Holistic
> Verification
> Evidence
> TRUE
> TRUE
> Original Claim
> Generated Sub-claims
> Fine-Grained
> Verification
> The IOC is the authority responsible for
> organizing the Summer Olympics and
> the paralympic games. Founded in
> 1894, it is based in Lausanne,
> Switzerland.
> The claim is mostly
> true, except that IOC
> does not organize the
> Paralymic games
> X

Figure 1: Examples of holistic fact verification (upper) failed to identify inaccuracies, whereas fine-grained ver-ification (lower) clearly pinpointed the sources of error. In fine-grained verification, the FactLens Evaluator can be used to assess individual sub-claims and identify any alarming signals that may suggest the need for human intervention or regeneration of the sub-claims. 

specific sub-claims when necessary. The accuracy of the overall verification process depends heav-ily on the quality of these sub-claims; errors (e.g. oversimplification, omission of important details, or incorrect contextualization) in their formulation can lead to flawed verification outcomes. To detect potential issues early on in the sub-claim genera-tion process, we propose a set of metrics to quan-titatively assess sub-claim quality across several dimensions. 

2.1 Evaluation Metrics 

The decomposed sub-claims should meet criteria below to fully realize benefits of fine-grained ver-ification such as more precise identification of in-accuracies, enhanced transparency, and reduced ambiguity during evidence retrieval. 

Atomicity Each sub-claim should refer to a sin-gle factual unit within the original claim. This ensures if an error occurs, the inaccuracy can be precisely traced back to one or more specific sub-claims. Atomicity measures whether a sub-claim is truly atomic i.e. it focuses on only one rela-tion between a subject and an object. For example, the claim “ The International Olympic Committee (IOC) was established on June 23, 1895, in Paris, France ” is not atomic, as it makes assertions about both the time and location of the IOC’s establish-ment. The decomposition process transforms a single claim into a list of sub-claims. It is crucial this 18086 Correlation atomicity sufficiency fabrication coverage redundancy 

r ρ r ρ r ρ r ρ r ρ

LLM 0.40 0.39 0.14 0.09 0.34 0.43 0.43 0.45 0.56 0.52 

Statistical 0.58 0.59 — — 0.04 0.05 0.61 0.58 0.10 0.12   

> Table 1: Correlation of FactLens Evaluator scores with Human annotations on synthetic data (Readability is omitted due to its high subjectivity). r: Pearson Correlation Score; ρ: Spearman Correlation Score.

transformation is semantically equivalent, ensuring the combined list of sub-claims faithfully repre-sents the original claim and that each can be in-dependently verified. To address this aspect, we propose the metrics Sufficiency , Fabrication , and 

Coverage .

Sufficiency To perform fine-grained verification, each sub-claim needs to be independently verifi-able. This requires the sub-claims to be properly contextualized to avoid any added ambiguity. Suf-ficiency measures whether the sub-claim is unam-biguous and sufficiently contextualized with re-spect to the original claim. For example, in the orig-inal claim “ Amanda Bauer attended the University of Cincinnati. The school’s nickname is Bearcats. ”, the sub-claim “ The school’s nickname is Bearcats ”would be considered low in sufficiency because the reference to the school was omitted in the decom-position, making it ambiguous. 

Fabrication The decomposition process must not introduce additional information or attempt to correct factual errors. This metric is especially important when evaluating LLM decomposers, as LLMs are known to suffer from hallucination or the generation of made-up information. For exam-ple, in the original claim “ Sydney, the capital of Australia, is known for its Opera House and Har-bour Bridge ” , a sub-claim “ Sydney is the capital of New South Wales, Australia ” is considered fabri-cation. Similarly, with the source claim “ Net sales will reach 30 million if the growth rate in 2024 is the same as in 2023 ” , a sub-claim “ The growth rate of 2024 is the same as in 2023 ” is considered fabrication because it treats a condition as a claim. 

Coverage The list of sub-claims must cover all factual assertions in the original claims, leaving no sub-claims missing. For instance, with the claim “Amanda Bauer attended the University of Cincin-nati, whose nickname is Bearcats ” , if only one sub-claim is generated as “ Amanda Bauer attended the University of Cincinnati ” , the coverage will be considered low because the assertion about the university’s nickname is missing. Additionally, some dimensions might not di-rectly affect downstream verifiability and accuracy but capture some nice-to-have characteristics of the sub-claims. 

Redundancy This metric measures whether the sub-claims, as a whole, contain redundant facts. When some sub-claims are semantically repetitive, the distribution of the fact-check units might be skewed. For example, if one erroneous sub-claim is repeated three times, the final judgment could shift from “mostly correct except for one sub-claim” to “more than half of the sub-claims were wrong.” Fur-thermore, redundancy also introduces unnecessary costs in terms of time and computing resources. 

Readability This metric assesses how readable the sub-claims are to the end-user and imposes a penalty on unnaturally formed sub-claims. For each of these metrics, the sub claims are evaluated by assigning a score of ‘low’, ‘medium’ or ‘high’. For coverage and redundancy , the scores are assigned at the claim level as we consider the 

sub-claims as a whole. For all other metrics, scores are assigned to each sub-claim and then aggregated. 

Ideal metric values : For an ideal claim de-composition, we expect the sub-claim to possess high atomicity , high sufficiency , high coverage and high readability, while having low fabrication and low redundancy .

2.2 FactLens Evaluator 

FactLens evaluator utilizes an ensemble method of LLM-generated evaluation scores and statistically computed scores (more details in Appendix B.1 and B.2 respectively). We use LLMs as evalua-tors due to their ability to scale well compared to human evaluators, as well as their reliability and knowledge across diverse domains. However, ac-knowledging the limitations of LLMs (Bavaresco et al., 2024; Stureborg et al., 2024), our statistical 18087 scores rely on entity and semantic-based computa-tions. In Table 1, we report the correlation scores of hu-man annotators with the FactLens Evaluator scores, on a synthetic data (more details in Appendix B.4 and C) that has been carefully curated to cover var-ious types of sub-claim errors. We observe fair to moderate agreement across all dimensions between human evaluations and FactLens Evaluator scores, except for sufficiency . The moderate correlation scores can be attributed to the subjectivity involved in judging such metrics. The dependency on con-textual information and evidence for assessing the 

sufficiency of a sub-claim contributes to the lower correlation scores for this metric. Nevertheless, our results demonstrate that our computation methods for the FactLens Evaluator align moderately well with human judgments on a dataset with varying sub-claim quality. 

3 FactLens: Benchmarking Fine-grained Verification 

3.1 Dataset Creation 

The FactLens benchmark contains a dataset with ground-truth sub-claims and fine-grained labels. We use 733 instances from CoverBench (Jacovi et al., 2024), a fact-checking benchmark focused on complex claim verification sampled from diverse sources and domains, as the original claims. We utilize two state-of-the-art LLMs —

GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) and LLaMA-3.1 (Meta, 2024) (details available in Appendix A) — to gen-erate candidate sub-claims and measure the quality of these generations using the FactLens Evaluator. To ensure the high quality of the generated sub-claims, we engage human annotators (details pro-vided in the Appendix C) to review all sub-claims and manually generate the ground-truth sub-claims, correcting any inaccuracies in the LLM-generated sub-claims (details in Appendix F). To isolate the benefits of fine-grained verifica-tion, we do not perform the step of retrieving evi-dence or context for each sub-claim. Instead, we use the evidence and context provided in Cover-Bench, along with the generated sub-claims, to perform fact verification. This approach eliminates variability in the results that could arise from dif-ferent methods and processes of evidence retrieval. The next step in fine-grained verification in-volves using a ‘verifier’ model to fact-check each sub-claim against the provided evidence. In this 

> Figure 2: Impact of sub-claim quality metrics on verifi-cation performance. See Appendix E for details.

work, we use GPT-4o-mini as our verifier model across all experiments to maintain consistency. This verification method enables an enriched fine-grained evaluation. To compare the perfor-mance of fine-grained verification labels (for each sub-claim) with the holistic verification label, we aggregate the fine-grained labels as false if at least one of the fine-grained labels is also false ;otherwise, the claim is considered true .

3.2 Claim Decomposition: Model Performance 

We utilize the prompt defined in Table 3 to decom-pose claims using GPT-4o and Llama-3.1(405B) .In Table 2, we tabulate the evaluation performance of both these models on the claim decomposition task using FactLens Evaluator. For each instance, we map the ‘low’, ‘medium’, ‘high’ scores (‘non-atomic-2’, ‘non-atomic-1’, ‘atomic’ for atomicity ) to numerical values (1, 2, 3 respectively), and report the average for each metric across all 733 instances in the CoverBench 

dataset. Both models have similar performance and per-form well on the task, as per expected results of having sub-claims which are highly sufficient, low in fabrication, high in coverage, low in redundancy and possess high readability. The atomicity scores are far lower, as we qualitatively observe several instances of the type having one subject but multi-ple objects (‘non-atomic-1’ which is mapped to a score of 2) 18088 Model Atomicity ↑ Sufficiency ↑ Fabrication ↓ Coverage ↑ Redundancy ↓ Readability ↑               

> Llama-3.1 1.87 2.85 1.01 2.88 1.09 2.96
> GPT-4o 1.82 2.85 1.02 2.89 1.15 2.95
> Table 2: Measure of sub-claim quality using prompt-based contextualized decomposition. We report average scores on CoverBench . Up & down arrows indicate which metrics should ideally be high ( ∼3) or low ( ∼1) respectively.

3.3 Evaluation Results 

In fine-grained verification, our FactLens evalu-ators can act as judges of generated sub-claims, providing early revision signals if the sub-claims might lead to problematic verifications. To illus-trate this, we perform an end-to-end evaluation (as shown in Figure 2) to highlight how the final verifi-cation performance is affected by the quality of the sub-claims. For example, we expect high-quality sub-claims to exhibit low fabrication scores. We note that for claim decompositions with a fabri-cation score classified as ‘low,’ the downstream fact-checking performance i.e. F1-score, is higher compared to those with ‘medium’ or ‘high’ fabri-cation scores. Similarly, we observe trends where sub-claims with higher atomicity , sufficiency , coverage , and 

readability scores demonstrate better verification performance. Although sub-claims with lower re-dundancy scores perform marginally better, the overall verification performance remains similar. This can be explained by the fact that highly redun-dant sub-claims may simply repeat claims without negatively impacting the final verification label. 

4 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce the benchmark FactLens to evaluate fine-grained claim verification, enrich-ing existing benchmarks. We also identify impor-tant metrics for assessing the quality of fine-grained sub-claims and propose an automated evaluator to provide early signals of decomposition failures and evaluate claim decomposition approaches. 

Limitations 

Computation of Metrics We utilize two meth-ods for computation of FactLens Evaluation met-rics: LLM-based and statistically computed. Using LLMs as evaluators/judges is a research field be-ing explored and improved continuously. However, existing works (Stureborg et al., 2024; Bavaresco et al., 2024) have highlighted the limitations of using LLMs in such evaluation tasks, with their scores being skewed and inconsistent. To mitigate inconsistency, we provided specific instructions in the prompt (Table 4) to LLMs. We measured the agreement & correlation scores of LLMs with human judgement scores, observing fair-moderate agreement across most metrics. Fur-thermore, we propose our own definitions for com-putation of the FactLens Evaluator scores. How-ever, we acknowledge the limitations in our com-putational approach as well, with it relying on the method for entity extraction, which may produce variable results. We aim to propose more concrete definitions for these metrics in future works. 

Evidence Retrieval To ensure there is no vari-ability in the fact-verification task, in this work we utilize the ground truth evidence which is present in the CoverBench dataset. This allows us to solely measure the dependency of fact-verification on the claim-decomposition and sub-claim quality. With our FactLens Benchmark, we provide motivation for fine-grained labels to soon be included across fact-verification benchmarks. In future works, we hope to show how claim decompositions may also improve the evidence search & retrieval process. 

Fact Verification Models Previous works com-pared different verification models in the fact check-ing task. Tang et al. (2024a) contrast the perfor-mance of MNLI-based, LLM-based and their pro-posed fine-tuned models for fact-verification. In this work, we choose to use GPT-4o-mini as our only verifier model , as our aim is not to propose stronger models for verification; but to illustrate the benefits of fine-grained verification even using simpler off-the-shelf verifier models .

What are Facts? Fact extraction is a domain which still has a lot of room for improvement. Some previous works (Wang et al., 2024) also dis-tinguish between factual claims, opinions and stan-dard sentences. In this work, we utilize the Cover-Bench claims, which itself is obtained from bench-marks which rely on human or synthetic methods for claim generation. It can be noted that differ-ent types of factual claims may be generated with such a process, as some claims may center around 18089 a claim that is universally true (eg. “Earth revolves around the Sun."), while other claims are depen-dent heavily on the context/evidence (eg. “There are 3 players whose home state is Missouri"). Moreover, factual claims in real world-scenarios can often be temporal and domain-dependent in nature. For example, a claim such as “ The legal drinking age is 18 ” is false in a country such as the United States, however may be true in the United Kingdom, indicating domain dependence. Sim-ilarly, evidence retrieved for the claim “ Barack Obama is the President of the US ” is temporal in nature. We note that our results and experiments are also based on existing benchmarks, which do not account for all real-world scenarios. 

References 

Rami Aly, Zhijiang Guo, Michael Sejr Schlichtkrull, James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, Oana Cocarascu, and Arpit Mittal. 2021. Feverous: Fact extraction and verifi-cation over unstructured and structured information. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1). Anna Bavaresco, Raffaella Bernardi, Leonardo Berto-lazzi, Desmond Elliott, Raquel Fern’andez, Al-bert Gatt, E. Ghaleb, Mario Giulianelli, Michael Hanna, Alexander Koller, Andr’e F. T. Martins, Philipp Mondorf, Vera Neplenbroek, Sandro Pezzelle, Barbara Plank, David Schlangen, Alessandro Sug-lia, Aditya K Surikuchi, Ece Takmaz, and Alberto Testoni. 2024. Llms instead of human judges? alarge scale empirical study across 20 nlp evaluation tasks. ArXiv, abs/2406.18403. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-ume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou, and William Yang Wang. 2020. Tabfact : Alarge-scale dataset for table-based fact verifica-tion. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Farima Fatahi Bayat, Kun Qian, Benjamin Han, Yisi Sang, Anton Belyy, Samira Khorshidi, Fei Wu, Ihab Ilyas, and Yunyao Li. 2023. FLEEK: Factual error detection and correction with ev-idence retrieved from external knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 124–130, Singapore. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Alon Jacovi, Moran Ambar, Eyal Ben-David, Uri Sha-ham, Amir Feder, Mor Geva, Dror Marcus, and Avi Caciularu. 2024. Coverbench: A challenging bench-mark for complex claim verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03325. Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Yejin Bang, Delong Chen, Wenliang Dai, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2022. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys, 55:1 – 38. Jiho Kim, Sungjin Park, Yeonsu Kwon, Yohan Jo, James Thorne, and Edward Choi. 2023. FactKG: Fact verification via reasoning on knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 16190–16206, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Miaoran Li, Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Zhu Zhang. 2024. Self-checker: Plug-and-play modules for fact-checking with large lan-guage models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pages 163–181, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3214– 3252, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhenghao Liu, Chenyan Xiong, Maosong Sun, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2020. Fine-grained fact verification with kernel graph attention network. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7342–7351, On-line. Association for Computational Linguistics. Meta. 2024. Llama-3.1. Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle-moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 12076–12100, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2024. Gpt-4o. Liangming Pan, Xiaobao Wu, Xinyuan Lu, Anh Tuan Luu, William Yang Wang, Min-Yen Kan, and 18090 Preslav Nakov. 2023. Fact-checking complex claims with program-guided reasoning. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6981–7004, Toronto, Canada. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng, Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars Lidén, Zhou Yu, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Check your facts and try again: Improving large language models with external knowledge and automated feed-back. ArXiv, abs/2302.12813. Michael Schlichtkrull, Yulong Chen, Chenxi White-house, Zhenyun Deng, Mubashara Akhtar, Rami Aly, Zhijiang Guo, Christos Christodoulopoulos, Oana Cocarascu, Arpit Mittal, James Thorne, and Andreas Vlachos. 2024. The automated verification of tex-tual claims (AVeriTeC) shared task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Fact Extraction and VERification Workshop (FEVER), pages 1–26, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiasheng Si, Yibo Zhao, Yingjie Zhu, Haiyang Zhu, Wenpeng Lu, and Deyu Zhou. 2024. CHECK-WHY: Causal fact verification via argument structure. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15636–15659, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rickard Stureborg, Dimitris Alikaniotis, and Yoshi Suhara. 2024. Large language models are inconsis-tent and biased evaluators. ArXiv, abs/2405.01724. Liyan Tang, Philippe Laban, and Greg Durrett. 2024a. MiniCheck: Efficient fact-checking of LLMs on grounding documents. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 8818–8847, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Nan Tang, Chenyu Yang, Ju Fan, Lei Cao, Yuyu Luo, and Alon Y. Halevy. 2024b. Verifai: Verified gen-erative ai. In 14th Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR 2024), Chaminade, HI, USA. James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018. FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. ArXiv, abs/2302.13971. Yuxia Wang, Revanth Gangi Reddy, Zain Muhammad Mujahid, Arnav Arora, Aleksandr Rubashevskii, Ji-ahui Geng, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Liangming Pan, Nadav Borenstein, Aditya Pillai, Isabelle Au-genstein, Iryna Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. 2024. Factcheck-bench: Fine-grained evaluation bench-mark for automatic fact-checkers. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 14199–14230, Miami, Florida, USA. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. ArXiv, abs/1904.09675. 

A Claim Decomposition 

We utilize few-shot prompting to decompose a claim into sub-claims. Table 3 shows the prompt used to capture the objective of generating sub-claims which are atomic, yet contextualized with enough information preserved from the original claim. For the few-shot demonstrations we sample 4 instances from the FEVEROUS dataset (Aly et al., 2021), ensuring no overlap with the CoverBench 

data. Finally in the prompt, we randomly select 3 of the 4 demonstrations and shuffle the order, to ensure there is no bias. We utilize GPT-4o and Llama-3.1(405B) mod-els for this task, with temperature = 0. 

B Evaluating Claim Decomposition 

To evaluate the sub-claims, our FactLens Evalua-tor utilizes LLM-generated as well as statistically computed scores. 

B.1 Prompt for Evaluating Claim Decomposition 

In Table 4, we provide the prompt to LLMs used for evaluating the claim decompositions across the 6 metrics defined in Section 2.1. We provide clear instructions using which LLMs can judge the claim decompositions across different dimensions. For all metrics except “coverage” and “redundancy”, the sub-claims are passed one at a time to obtain sub-claim level evaluation. “Coverage” and “redun-dancy” are used to judge the sub-claims as a whole, hence for these metrics, we provide the entire set of sub-claim decompositions for that instance. For “atomicity" we ask the LLM to output a label as 18091 We aim to fact-check a textual claim. To make the fact-checking task simpler, we break down a claim into simpler, atomic sub-claims to fact-check as needed. Note that atomic sub-claims refer to unit claims within the original claim, that refer to a single concept that can be independently verified without having to refer to the original claim. Verification of the sub-claims should not require aggregation of facts or multi-hop reasoning over concepts. However, the sub-claim should have all the contextual information preserved from the original claim. Your task is to break down a claim into atomic sub-claims for fact checking only if needed. If the original claim itself is a unit claim, do not break it down. For example: 

{demonstrations} 

Note how each sub claim contains atomic information to fact check and is brief, yet is contextualized with all the information needed from the original claim. Now find the sub claims from the following claim. Claim: {claim} 

Sub_Claims: < your output in form of a list > 

=================================================================== 

Table 3: Claim Decomposition Prompt 

A factual claim can be broken down into atomic, yet contextualized sub-claims which makes it easier to fact check. You will be provided a claim, and one of the sub-claims which have been extracted from it. Your job is to evaluate this sub-claim on the following metric: {metric} Your answer should either be “low", “medium" or “high" based on the metric provided. Please be objective and fair in your evaluation. Claim: {claim} Sub-Claim: {sub_claim} 

=================================================================== 

The instructions to calculate each metric is passed one at a time as follows: 

“atomicity”: If the sub-claim is atomic i.e. it is simple and centers around only one subject and one object, and the verification does not require aggregation of facts or multihop reasoning over concepts. Label the sub-claim as either “atomic” which denotes one subject and one object, or “non-atomic-1” which denotes one subject, multiple objects, or “non-atomic-2” which denotes multiple subjects “sufficiency”: If the sub-claim itself is sufficient to be fact-checked without the need of any additional contextual information i.e. the sub-claim contains all the required contextual information to be fact-checked independently and is not ambiguous. Your answer should indicate whether the sub-claim has “low”, “medium” or “high” sufficiency. "redundancy": If the sub-claims contain redundant or repeated information among them, i.e. multiple semantically equivalent sub-claims. Your answer should indicate whether the sub-claims have “low”, “medium” or “high” redundancy. “coverage”: If the set of sub-claims cover all the facts and information made in the original claim. Your answer should indicate whether the sub-claims have “low”, “medium” or “high” coverage. “fabrication”: If the sub-claim shows a degree of fabrication with respect to the original claim i.e. how much new information is added which was not present in the original claim. Note this is not to be judged according to the factuality of the original claims or sub-claims. Your answer should indicate whether the sub-claim has “low”, “medium” or “high” fabrication. “readability”: If the sub-claim is readable to an end user. Your answer should indicate whether the sub-claim has “low”, “medium” or “high” readability. 

Table 4: Prompt for Evaluating Claim Decompositions using LLMs 

per specific instructions, while for each of the re-maining metrics we prompt the LLM to judge the instance with a “low", “medium” or “high” score. We utilize the smaller and cheaper Ope-nAI model GPT-4o-mini for this task, with 

temperature = 0. 

B.2 Statistically Computed Evaluation 

To compute the FactLens Evaluation metrics us-ing statistical methods we rely on entity-based and semantic-based calculations. Given one in-stance, with claim C, we extract all the (Subject, Object) pairs present within it using gpt-4o-mini; temperature = 0 , and from there create a list of 

S = subjects, and O = objects. After decomposing the claim, we obtain sub-claims c = { c1, c2, ..., cn}. For all i in [1, n], we extract the subjects si and object oi lists in a similar manner. We next follow these definitions to calculate the following metrics: 

Atomicity To measure atomicity, we use an entity-based computation method of comparing the number of subjects and objects involved in the sub-claim ci. If ci revolves around only one 18092 subject and one object eg. “Kurt Cobain was a guitarist ”, it is labeled ‘atomic’. if len (si) = 1 and len (oi) = 1, 

atomicity = ‘atomic’ If ci revoles around one subject, but multiple objects eg. “ Kurt Cobain was a guitarist and a singer ”, it is labeled ‘non-atomic-1’. if len (si) = 1 and len (oi) > 1, 

atomicity = ‘non-atomic-1’ However, if ci revolves around multiple subjects eg. “ Kurt Cobain was a member of the band Nir-vana, which was co-founded with Krist Novoselic ”, it is labeled ‘non-atomic-2’. if len (si) > 1, 

atomicity = ‘non-atomic-2’ 

Sufficiency As sufficiency is a tough metric to judge using semantic techniques, we rely on LLM evaluation scores. 

Fabrication To calculate fabrication, we count all subjects in each si that do not appear in S i.e. subjects in the original claim, and all objects in each oi that do not appear in O i.e. objects in the original claim. If the count for f ab is equal to 0, i.e. no new entities present in the sub-claims, the fabrication 

is ‘low’. Based on thresholding values, we assign scores of ‘medium’ or ‘high’ fabrication .

Coverage To measure coverage , we check if the entities (subjects and objects) in all sub-claims ci

include all the subjects S and objects O present in the original claim. if ∪(si) ∀ i = S and ∪(oi) ∀ i = O,

coverage = ‘high’ In case there is no overlap, coverage = ‘low’, and for all other cases coverage = ‘medium’ 

Redundancy To calculate redundancy, we use semantic-based technique by measuring BertScore (Zhang et al., 2019) between each pair of sub-claims. If there is high similarity between two 

red =

> n

∑

> i=1
> n

∑

> j=1

I(i̸ = j, BertScore (ci, c j ) > T )

, where T is a threshold value to find BertScore(.) similarity and n is the number of sub-claims gener-ate for that instance. Based on the number of redundant claims found, we assign scores of ‘low’, ‘medium’ and ‘high’. 

Readability We rely on LLM generated evalua-tions to measure readability. 

B.3 FactLens Evaluation using Ensemble Method 

As previously mentioned, in Table 1 we tabulate the correlation between Human scores and our LLM-generated & statistically computed scores on the synthetic with varying claim decomposition quality. Based on the results across the metrics, we propose to utilize the statistically computed scores for atom-icity and coverage (as they are better correlated than the LLM-generated scores), while using LLM-generated evaluations for the rest of the metrics in our experiment results in Section 3.3. 

B.4 Agreement Scores on Synthetic Data 

In Table 1 we observed fair to moderate correlation between humans and FactLens Evaluator scores through Pearson and Spearman correlation scores. We provide the corresponding p-values in Table 5, from which we conclude the correlation scores for atomicity , coverage (both LLM-Human and Statistical-Human), fabrication , and redundancy 

(LLM-Human) are statistically significant. In addition to the correlation scores in Table 1, we also report agreement scores between Hu-man annotators and FactLensEvaluator. We report the ordinal Krippendorff’s Alpha score to mea-sure the agreement. We observe fair to moder-ate agreement across all dimensions except ‘suffi-ciency’, which can be attributed to the dependency on contextual information and evidence to judge 

sufficiency of a sub-claim. The synthetic data is curated using 10 claims from the FEVEROUS benchmark and generating expert-annotated claim decompositions with pertur-bations. For each claim we generate 7 claim decom-positions: one with perfect quality sub-claims, one LLM generated sub-claim, and others using pertur-bations resulting in lower quality sub-claims corre-sponding to each of the following 5 metrics: atom-icity , sufficiency , fabrication , coverage and redun-dancy . We exclude readability in the agreement-scores, as it is an extremely subjective metric. 18093 P-values atomicity sufficiency fabrication coverage redundancy 

r ρ r ρ r ρ r ρ r ρ

LLM 4e-10 5e-10 0.140 0.437 5.1e-4 2.63e-7 2.9e-4 2.4e-4 3.26e-6 7.78e-6 

Statistical 1e-9 1e-9 — — 0.166 0.176 7.7e-8 1.1e-6 0.404 0.332 

> Table 5: P-values from Table 1: Correlation of FactLens Evaluator scores with Human annotations on synthetic data

Metric Krippendorff’s Alpha 

Atomicity 0.4421 Sufficiency 0.0486 Fabrication 0.4085 Coverage 0.5300 Redundancy 0.4240 

> Table 6: Alignment of FactLens Evaluator scores with Human annotations on synthetic data

C Expert Annotations 

For human annotations on the synthetic data (Sec-tion 2.2) and the creation for the benchmark, we recruited two in-house expert annotators. The an-notators are proficient in English, currently based in the United States of America, with at least a graduate-level degree. For the task, they were pro-vided the same instructions as the prompt to LLMs in Table 4. The annotators were clearly explained the objective of the task and how their annotations would be utilized. The inter-annotator agreement score (Krippen-dorff Alpha) is high, as tabulated in Table 7. 

Metric Inter-Annotator Agreement 

Atomicity 0.73 Sufficiency 0.53 Fabrication 0.54 Coverage 0.86 Redundancy 0.94 Readability 0.96 

> Table 7: Inter-Annotator Agreement score

To measure correlation between the FactLens Evaluator scores and human scores, we do an av-erage of FactLens Evaluator score on a metric with both the annotators, and repeat for all metrics. The human annotators were also used to generate ground-truth sub-claims (Section 3.1). 

> Figure 3: As complexity (i.e. number of sub-claims) increases, the performance of sub-claim decomposition significantly improves.

D Fine-Grained Verification 

We study the benefits of fine-grained fact verifi-cation compared to verifying the whole claim in Figure 3. In order to perform verification, we utilize 

GPT-4o-mini to judge if a claim is true or false 

based on the evidence provided. We obtain the ground truth evidence present in the CoverBench 

dataset. In order to show the benefits of fine-grained ver-ification, we compare it with the method of holisti-cally verifying the original claim without decom-positions. In the first case, we simply pass the original 18094 claim C along with the evidence to be verified. In the second case, we pass the claim’s decomposi-tions c = { c1, c2, ..., cn} one at a time. For each ci

we obtain a verification label, and then aggregate the labels for that instance. If any one sub-claim is judged false the whole instance is marked false ,otherwise true .We contrast the performance of the fine-grained verification with holistic verification in Figure 3. Here, we assume the number of sub-claims of an instance is indicative of how complex the claim is. We observe that as the complexity (number of sub-claims) increase, the performance of the fine-grained verification method significantly increases compared to holistic verification. 

E Impact of Sub Claim Quality on Verification 

> Figure 4: Fine-Grained Verification: Logistic Regres-sion Coefficients for Metrics

In Figure 2, we showed how sub-claim quality impacts the end-to-end verification result. To truly understand the benefits of fine-grained decomposi-tions and the FactLens metrics, we only consider those instances for which the number of sub-claims was greater than 1. Here, we illustrate further using qualitative examples and weights of a logistic re-gression model to show the influence of FactLens Evaluator Metrics on fine-grained verification. To deeper understand how each metric influences the final verification, we fit a logistic regression model on the FactLens Evaluator scores on Cover-Bench . We specifically study the impact of the met-rics atomicity , sufficiency , fabrication and coverage 

as we expect them to influence the final verification more than the “nice-to-have" metrics: redundancy 

and readability .We also conducted an analysis to understand how the scores can collectively predict the final verification accuracy by fitting a logistic regres-sion model and examining the coefficients associ-ated with each metric. Combining the four met-rics—atomicity, fabrication, coverage, and suffi-ciency—we achieved a prediction F1 score of 0.71, despite potential noise in the retrieval and verifica-tion steps. 

> Figure 5: Distribution of Number of Sub Claims in FactLens Benchmark

From Figure 4, we observe that fabrication 

has the highest weight in magnitude, implying most influence in predicting whether the final la-bel matches with ground truth. We see a neg-ative weight for fabrication which is expected as lower fabrication indicates better quality sub-claims which in turn should have a positive ef-fect on verification. Atomicity , sufficiency and cov-erage show a positive weight, as highly atomic, highly sufficient and high coverage sub-claims are expected to influence verification positively. We also highlight some qualitative examples in Table 8 to show how sub-claim quality impacts 18095 Claim : Fresh water crustaceans Aeglidae are classified as Malocostraca and Decapoda. 

Gold Label : False 

Evidence : [ground truth evidence from CoverBench . . . ] 

Sub Claims : [‘Fresh water crustaceans Aeglidae are classified as Malocostraca’, ‘Fresh water crustaceans Aeglidae are classified as Decapoda’] 

FactLens Evaluation :• Atomicity : [‘atomic’, ‘atomic’] • Sufficiency : [‘high’, ‘high’] • Fabrication : [‘low’, ‘low’] • Coverage : ‘high’ • Redundancy : ‘low’ • Readability : ‘high’ 

Fine-Grained Verification Labels : [True, False] 

Aggregated Fine-Grained Verification Label : False 

======================================================================= 

Claim : In addition to co-starring in a Ken Ludwig musical, Jeffry Denman has worked with notables such as Mel Brooks, and has been called "a natural scene stealer" by The Houston Chronicle. 

Gold Label : False 

Evidence : [ground truth evidence from CoverBench . . . ] 

Sub-Claims : [‘Jeffry Denman co-starred in a Ken Ludwig musical’, ‘Jeffry Denman has worked with Mel Brooks’, ‘Jeffry Denman has been called a natural scene stealer by The Houston Chronicle’] 

FactLens Evaluation :• Atomicity : [‘atomic’, ‘atomic’, ‘non-atomic-2’] • Sufficiency : [‘high’, ‘high’, ‘high’] • Fabrication : [‘low’, ‘low’, ‘low’] • Coverage : ‘medium’ • Redundancy : ‘low’ • Readability : [‘high’, ‘high’, ‘high’] 

Fine-Grained Verification Labels : [True, True, True] 

Aggregated Fine-Grained Verification Label : True 

Table 8: Examples of how sub claim quality impacts verification performance 

fine-grained verification. In the first instance, with perfect sub-claim quality, the fine-grained verifica-tion correctly predicts the ground truth label. In the second instance, we see coverage as ‘medium’ and imperfect atomicity score whereby the verifier eventually predicts an incorrect label. 

F FactLens Dataset Characteristics 

Our FactLens benchmarks consists of 733 instances from CoverBench with ground truth decomposi-tions curated using LLMs and humans, and fine-grained labels as mentioned in Section 3.1. In Fig-ure 5 we note the distribution of the number of sub-claims in the dataset. 18096