Title: 2024.findings-emnlp.958.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.958.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 10 Nov 2024 15:23:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 16422–16435 November 12-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Debate as Optimization: Adaptive Conformal Prediction and Diverse Retrieval for Event Extraction 

Sijia Wang ♡, Lifu Huang ♡,♠♡Virginia Tech ♠University of California, Davis 

{sijiawang,lifuh}@vt.edu 

Abstract 

We propose a multi-agent debate as optimiza-tion (DAO) system for event extraction, where the primary objective is to iteratively refine the large language models (LLMs) outputs through debating without parameter tuning. In DAO, we introduce two novel modules: the Diverse-RAG (DRAG) module and the Adap-tive Conformal Prediction (AdaCP) module. DRAG systematically retrieves supporting in-formation that best fits the debate discussion, while AdaCP enhances the accuracy and re-liability of event extraction by effectively re-jecting less promising answers. Experimental results demonstrate a significant reduction in the performance gap between supervised ap-proaches and tuning-free LLM-based methods by 18.1% and 17.8% on ACE05 and 17.9% and 15.2% on CASIE for event detection and argument extraction respectively. 1

1 Introduction 

Event extraction (EE) (Grishman, 1997; Chinchor and Marsh, 1998; Ahn, 2006) involves identify-ing and categorizing event mentions, expressed through trigger tokens and participants in natural language text. Recent studies show that leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) has led to remark-able advancements in numerous applications (Tou-vron et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023b,c). Their potent natural lan-guage understanding capabilities are generic and adaptable to nearly any open domain. However, a significant gap remains for event extraction be-tween advanced tuning-based approaches (Wadden et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2022b; Du and Cardie, 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023) and approaches without tuning (Li et al., 2023a; Han et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024).  

> 1The source code is publicly available at https://github. com/VT-NLP/DAO-EE .

LLMs struggle to match the performance of tuning-based approaches due to several challenges. First, the inherent ambiguities and variations in event mentions present significant obstacles in ac-curately identifying them. For instance, in the phrase “pay the fines”, two potential questions arise: whether the event type should be classified as a Transfer-Money or Fine event and whether the event trigger should be “pay” or “fines”. Sec-ond, existing solutions fail to efficiently incorpo-rate domain-specific knowledge, such as extensive event schemas. While a common solution is to enumerate event schemas into the prompt (Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c), LLMs can strug-gle to fully comprehend and utilize this informa-tion. Lastly, unlike tuning-based methods that can leverage annotated data, such as ACE05 (Linguis-tic Data Consortium, 2005) and ERE (Song et al., 2015), to learn implicit statistical features and re-solve nuanced semantic differences, LLMs are dif-ficult to tune, even with small amounts of data, par-ticularly without access to the model checkpoint. To address these challenges, we introduce a tuning-free multi-agent Debating-as-Optimization (DAO) framework. This approach demonstrates that event extraction answers can be gradually opti-mized through debates among LLM agents without domain-specific fine-tuning, allowing the system to adapt effortlessly to new domains or ontologies. To optimize the initial solution, we propose two novel modules: the diverse retrieval augmented module (DRAG) and the adaptive conformal prediction module (AdaCP). The DRAG module dynamically retrieves domain-specific data entries that best fit the current points of disagreement. The AdaCP model employs an adaptive conformal prediction policy to progressively reject less convincing an-swers based on the retrieved knowledge. The event extraction answer is gradually refined through more precise retrieval of domain-specific knowledge and the application of stricter rejection rules. Our aim 

16422 is to demonstrate that the significant performance gap can be narrowed with the proposed multi-agent debate framework. The contribution of the proposed work includes • A novel multi-agent debate framework is intro-duced, which highlights the refining of event extraction answers through a debating pro-cess. • An Adaptive Conformal Prediction module, AdaCP, is proposed to systematically reject less convincing answers. • A Diverse-RAG Module (DRAG) is devel-oped, featuring dynamic clustering techniques to accurately retrieve reference information crucial for achieving correct outcomes. • Though the performance gap against fine-tuning-based approaches persists, significant improvements are achieved across various datasets. 

2 Related Work 

LLMs for Event Extraction Early studies (Gao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Wei et al., 2024; Han et al., 2023) utilized specific guidelines or instruc-tions to prompt the LLMs to directly perform in-ference on event extraction. However, the experi-mental results reveal that current LLMs may lack the comprehensive event schema knowledge nec-essary for extracting event information effectively from text. Recent investigations (Lin et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023) have delved into in-context learning, wherein task instructions and a few in-context examples are provided. However, their empirical results highlight a significant perfor-mance disparity between in-context learning and approaches relying on fine-tuning. Guideline Learning(Pang et al., 2023) iteratively refines a set of rules from sample data and uses these rules as additional support to guide LLM in-ference. However, refining the rules necessitates a substantial amount of annotation data, such as 50 samples per class in their design (some event types in the existing EE dataset do not have sufficient data). This requirement makes it challenging to generalize to domains or tasks without abundant annotations. Filter-then-rerank(Ma et al., 2023) prompts LLMs to rerank a small portion of difficult samples identified by SLMs. However, designing an SLM for a new domain requires extensive hu-man effort, which limits the generalizability of this approach to new domains. 

Multi-agent System Multi-agent collaboration has drawn considerable attention benefit from the development of autonomous agents based on LLMs, including GPTs (Brown et al., 2020; Ope-nAI, 2023b,a,c), Antrophic LMs, LLaMAs (Tou-vron et al., 2023a,b), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023), etc.. There are two cate-gories of interactions for multi-agent systems, co-operative interaction and adversarial interaction. Agents in cooperative interaction are carefully de-signed to serve their duties and work together to finish the task (Zhou et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). On the other hand, adversarial interactive approaches are designed to derive accurate and con-sistent conclusions in a debating manner. Adver-sarial multi-agent debate systems mostly consist of multiple debaters (Du et al., 2023), with the choice to intergrate a summarizer (Chan et al., 2023), a judge (Liang et al., 2023), and a critic agent (Fu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a). The challenge in implementing a multi-agent debate system for information extraction lies in determining how to retrieve essential information and steer the discus-sion effectively. 

Retrieval Augmented Generation Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) has proven to be effective across various recent applications (Lewis et al., 2020; Glass et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Siriwardhana et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024). Ex-isting RAG methods proposed advanced strategies concerning what to retrieve and when to trust the retrieved content. For example, (Li et al., 2023b) and (Jiang et al., 2023) advocate for retrieval based on the confidence level of the LLMs regarding the content. (Zhang et al., 2023) propose a method for progressively retrieving relevant code snippets in code completion. Asai et al. (2024) and Wu et al. (2024) suggest selecting retrieved content depending on output quality, leveraging the self-reflection and self-evaluation capabilities of the LM. However, the exploration of progressively re-trieving more fine-grained content to benefit com-plex inquiries remains relatively unexplored. This work takes one step forward by advocating retrieval with conformal prediction and adaptively retrieving more fine-grained content, consequently enhancing decision-making processes. 16423 3 Approach 

In event extraction (EE), two sub-tasks are in-volved: event detection (ED) and event argument extraction (EAE). The proposed Debating as Op-timization (DAO) framework tackles both ED and EAE through a unified debating process, employ-ing distinct task-specific prompts for each sub-task. Detailed agent prompts are in Appendix B. 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

The task of EE is to identify event mentions within a sentence, which consist of an event trigger and related event arguments. In formal terms, given a sentence w = {w1, ..., w n} and a specified tar-get event type ei, an EE system aims to extract the event trigger t and its associated argument mentions a = {a1, ..., a g}. In this work, we fo-cus on in-context learning (ICL) with M sam-ple selection, where M indicates the maximum number of examples to be included in the sys-tem. Formally, in-context learning with M sam-ple selection can be outlined as follows: given a sentence w, a dataset D, a set of M examples 

D(M ) = {d1, ..., d m|m ≤ M } can be sampled as in-context examples for inference on each w. This is an instance-based in-context example selection setting designed to exploit the event extraction ca-pabilities and reasoning capabilities of LLMs with limited computation and without tuning. 

3.2 Debate as Optimization 3.2.1 Debate Agents 

As shown in Figure 1, the proposed debate frame-work consists of four types of agents: the Debaters, the Critic, the Judge, and the Summarizer. Each debating agent role is designed to serve specific responsibilities to optimize the final solution. De-baters are the agents that generate opinions and defend or adjust opinions based on the given infor-mation. Given a specific question, the debaters first need to generate preferably different opinions. De-pending on the retrieved information, the debaters will also reason, defend, or adjust their solution. The Critic is asked to identify any potential errors that have been made by the debaters. The respon-sibility of the Judge is to determine whether the debaters have reached an agreement on their so-lution. The Summarizer collects all the pieces of commonly agreed solutions and formalizes the final solution. 

3.2.2 Multi-Agent Debate Process 

A single round of the debating process consists of four stages: Initial Opinion Rendering, Event Infor-mation Retrieval, Cross-Examination, and Judge-ment. During the Initial Opinion Rendering stage, we aim to collect diverse opinions from the de-baters. This diversity can be achieved by setting dif-ferent temperatures or leveraging different LLMs, such as using ChatGPT and Gemini as debaters. The prompt for this stage is outlined as follows: 

Debater Prompt 

Given sentence: **[SENT]** Answer the fol-lowing question: [TASK_INSTRUCTION] It is essential that responses are as accurate as pos-sible; thus, detailed task instructions are preferred. Next, we retrieve two categories of event infor-mation for the Event Information Retrieval stage: (1) The event definition and descriptions from the event extraction guideline for every event type men-tioned in the initial opinions, and (2) Examples re-trieved by the proposed retrieval module (details are in Section 3.2.3). The acquired knowledge will then be broadcast to all the debating agents, exclud-ing the Judge, since the Judge’s decisions should be solely based on the consensus reached, rather than the specific content of the discussion. Every opinion rendered together with all the retrieved event information will be validated by an adaptive conformal prediction module, AdaCP, which is described in Section 3.2.4. Agents whose opinions have successfully passed AdaCP will pro-ceed to the Cross-Examination (CE) stage. This process comprises two components: debaters en-gage in debates with each other, while the Critic agent identifies potential flaws in the debaters’ re-sponses. The prompt for the debaters in this stage is as follows: 

Debater CE Prompt 

Carefully review the information in the event definitions and retrieved examples. Defend your answer, or update your answer. The prompt for the Critic agent is designed to be more informative. Our preliminary studies show that it it beneficial to include some common mis-takes in event extraction would be helpful. For example, the CE prompt for the Critic in ED is as 16424 True answer  

> (2) Get quantile
> ... left ...
> Event mentions? / Another event occurrence?
> What is the event type? Which
> token triggers the event?
> What are the related
> arguments?
> Agent B : I don't have
> enough context to deter-
> mine the event mentioned
> Agent A : the sentence
> mentions a potential
> life-threatening event.
> Agent C : the sentence
> mentions a movement
> event. they left

AdaCP 

DRAG   

> Critic : Life-threatening is not in the predefined event types, please ground it into
> predefined type. There is no error in Agent C's answer.
> Judge : Does the debate reach an agreement among agents? If so, exit and reply the
> answer, otherwise, the debate continues.
> Global History: []
> Append: {"event type": Movement:Transport, "event trigger": left , "arguments": }
> Local  Memory
> The sentence mentions a potential Movement:Transport event. The token
> "left" triggers the event.
> Event structure: {Event type: Movement:Transport; Trigger: left; Person: they}

Debate x N round 

AdaCP 

DRAG                  

> Sentence :U.S. Army's 7th Cavalry is in the forefront of U.S.
> troops since they left Kuwait and crossed the Iraqi desert
> the outbreak of the war
> The U.S. Army's 7th Cavalry has ... they enter Baghdad
> the outbreak of the war
> The U.S. Army's 7th Cavalry
> the u.s. army's 101st division
> they enter Baghdad
> the u.s. army's 101st division
> though , on the air war
> Iraqis come close to the road
> Iraqis come close to the road
> moved ...
> though , on the air war
> Please indicate the event mentioned in the following sentence: U.S. Army's 7th
> Cavalry is in the forefront of U.S. troops since they left Kuwait and crossed the
> Iraqi desert

Round 1 

Round 2 

DAO   

> (1) Compute scores on calibration set
> (3) Reject less convincing answer (4) Update reject threshold
> scores,
> # samples
> Debater answers
> Debater answers Debater answers
> risk

Figure 1: Debate As Optimization (DAO) framework 

follows: 

Critic CE Prompt 

After reviewing the event definition and exam-ples, assess whether the identified event type and event trigger align with the event occur-rence in the sentence. Consider whether there is any other event type that better matches the event mentioned in the sentence. Respond suc-cinctly with your judgment. At the end of each round of debate, we ask the Judge agent to make a Judgement on whether we have reached a consensus on the debate topic or if further debate is required. For example, the judge prompt for ED is as follows: 

Judge Prompt 

Do debaters and the critic reach an agreement on event type and trigger extraction? If so, reply in a table. The header of the table is | event type | event trigger |. If disagree, require reply: **No agreement, debate continues**. If both debaters believe there is no event mention involved, reply **No event**. A round of debate concludes either when the max-imum number of rounds is reached or when the judge decides an agreement has been reached. If an event type and event trigger are identified during the ED procedure, the system proceeds to debate argument extraction. Otherwise, it skips argument extraction. 

3.2.3 Diverse-RAG 

The Diverse-RAG (DRAG) module dynamically retrieves event related data entries that best fit the current points of disagreement. It is crafted around four key principles: (1) Distance . To enhance the informativeness of retrieved examples, we priori-tize semantic proximity. Utilizing a sentence en-coding method emb( ·), we encode both the input context x and reference texts Y = {yj}Nref 

j=0 

x = emb(x) , Y = {emb(y j)}Nref 

j=0 

The retrieval module then selects the top-K sen-tences closest in semantic representation. In our ex-periments, we set K to 128. (2) Diversity . Within the Top-K retrieved reference texts, some exam-ples may share common information that is not necessarily pertinent to the target event. For in-stance, identical long entity spans can inflate simi-larity scores. To address this, we employ clustering to group similar examples, mitigating redundancy. The clustering operation can be expressed as 

min 

K∑

j=1 

dis( cp, y j )2

s.t. dis( cpi , c pj ) > μ 16425 where μ is the clustering threshold. Exclusively one data entry from each cluster can be selected to be included in reference sentences for the current round. Additionally, the closest M data points from 

M distinct clusters are selected as the final refer-ence data entries. (3) Polarity . Effective event ex-traction requires consideration of both positive and negative reference event mentions. For instance, a token like "meeting" may or may not trigger a specific event category. Therefore, both positive and negative event mentions are included in the re-trieval. (4) Adaption . We conceptualize debating as an optimization process, evolving from broad to fine-grained retrieval. Initially, retrieval aims for breadth, gradually transitioning to more refined searches as the debate progresses. This evolution is captured through the decay of cluster radius over time, which can be formally expressed as 

μt = λ ∗ μt−1

where μt−1 is the clustering radius of the previous round, and λ is the cluster radius decay factor. 

3.2.4 Adaptive Conformal Prediction 

The objective of Adaptive Conformal Prediction (AdaCP) is to progressively reject less convincing answers. Previous conformal prediction techniques (Shafer and Vovk, 2008; Gammerman et al., 1998; Vovk et al., 2005; Jing Lei and Wasserman, 2013; Bates et al., 2021; Angelopoulos et al., 2022; Yang and Kuchibhotla, 2024; Quach et al., 2024) gener-ate a range of predictions encompassing the true output with a predetermined level of confidence. Our framework goes beyond the standard by ac-tively updating the conformal calibration configu-ration, iteratively rejecting less convincing answers based on the retrieved knowledge. Formally, conformal prediction either accepts or rejects the null hypothesis that the pairing (x, y )

is correct. The test method is a nonconformity measure, R(( x, y ), D), where D is a calibration dataset with annotated examples. Intuitively, a lower value of R reflects that point (x, y ) “con-forms” to D, whereas a higher value of M reflects that (x, y ) does not. Consider a calibration set 

Dcal = {(xi, y i)}Ncal  

> i=1

, where Ncal is the calibra-tion set size. The conformal generation risk is set as the 1 − δ quantile of the risk scores 

ˆq0 = Quantile( {r1, ·, r n}, ⌈(n + 1)(1 − δ)⌉

n ),

where ri = R(xi, y i), n = Ncal , and R(x, y ) : 

X × Y → R is an independent quality function, such as using the negative log-likelihood function of a standalone LM. The assumption is that for a fair-quality LM, the likelihood of a correct answer has a higher probability. The coverage guarantee confirms that the prediction set after calibration contains the true answer at risk level δ, which can be denoted as P[R(x, y ) ≤ ˆq] ≥ 1−δ. At inference time, we reject a debater’s answer if R(x, y ) > ˆq.Additionally, given the debating design of our system with retrieval, the conversation continues with increasing content and information. Then the risk score can be updated as ri = R(xi ⊕ c, y i),where c denotes the retrieved information. The risk score is expected to decrease with properly retrieved information. Thus we propose an adaptive nonconformity measure with a constant decay rate 

ˆqt = β × ˆqt−1

where ˆqt−1 is the nonconformity threshold of the debate round t − 1, and β is the decay factor. Intu-itively, AdaCP starts with a more inclusive rejec-tion configuration at the beginning of the debate process, allowing a broad range of potential event extraction answers to be considered. As the de-bate progresses and more event information is re-trieved, the calibration model becomes more confi-dent in identifying the accurate event answer. Con-sequently, a stricter policy is applied, progressively rejecting less convincing answers. 

4 Experimental Setup 

Dataset and Evaluation Metrics We con-ducted experiments on two public benchmark datasets, ACE05-E (Automatic Content Extraction, ACE05) 2 and CASIE (Satyapanich et al., 2020). For the ACE05, we reported evaluation results on the test set using the same test split as in (Lin et al., 2020). For the CASIE, we used the same test split as in Han et al. (2023). The evaluation is focused on three sub-tasks: ED, EAE where the ground truth trigger is given, and EE where ED and EAE are performed jointly. We only report argument extraction performance for EE following previous work (Han et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023). For the ACE05 dataset, we followed previous work (Lin et al., 2020) and used the Exact Match F1 score for evaluating ED and the Argument Head F1 score for evaluating EAE and EE. For the CASIE dataset, 

> 2https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2006T06

16426 we adhered to the evaluation standards established in previous studies (Satyapanich et al., 2020; Han et al., 2023), employing the types metric for all three sub-tasks. 

Baselines We consider the following baselines that utilize zero-shot or in-context learning capabil-ities of LLMs: (1) ChatGPT-14 (Li et al., 2023a), the first work that systematically analyzes the ChatGPT’s performance on information extraction (IE) tasks utilizing its zero-shot capabilities. (2) 

ChatGPT-IE (Han et al., 2023), which highlights that ChatGPT often generates longer trigger or ar-gument spans, contributing to the evaluation gap between ChatGPT and tuning-based approaches. A soft-matching strategy is proposed to mitigate this evaluation gap, thereby providing a more ac-curate reflection of ChatGPT’s performance. (3) 

ChatIE (Wei et al., 2024), a multi-turn question-answering framework for zero-shot IE, wherein the first stage collects all the possible event types and in the second stage it performs information extraction for each event type. (4) G-PTLM (Lin et al., 2023) regularize the event argument predic-tions by explicitly expressing argument constraints with prompts. (5) CODE4STRUCT (Wang et al., 2023c) formulate event extraction as a code gen-eration problem, and represents event ontology in Python code expression. (6) Code4UIE (Guo et al., 2023), another code generation-based approach, utilizing additional M annotations retrieved from the training corpus with the highest similarity to the input sentence. The retrieved examples are used as ICL examples. In addition to the zero-shot or in-context learning based approaches, we include three supervised fine-tuning (SFT) based approaches with relatively smaller LMs as base-lines, including DEGREE (Hsu et al., 2022b), In-structUIE (Wang et al., 2023b), and RexUIE (Liu et al., 2023). 

Implementation Details The proposed system is flexible, allowing any LLM to serve in any arbitrary agent role defined within the frame-work. In our experiments, we employ three LLMs: 

Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Llama3), Gemini-Pro 

(Gemini), and GPT-3.5-turbo (GPT). The re-sults are presented under two distinct settings: (a) Gemini-GPT: In this setting, two debaters are pow-ered by Gemini and GPT, respectively. The Critic agent is powered by Gemini, while the Judge agent is powered by GPT. (b) Llama3-GPT: Here, one de-bater uses Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Llama3), and the other uses GPT-3.5-turbo (GPT). Both the Critic and Judge agents are powered by Gemini. We set the temperature of all agents to 0 to ensure reproducibility. The Llama checkpoint is accessible at the Hug-gingface (AI@Meta, 2024) under Llama 3 Com-munity License Agreement. We use official API to access Gemini 3 and GPT 4 under commercial license. Additionally, the calibration model is 

Flant5-xxl 5. No tuning is involved for any of the LLMs. All the experiments are run with one NVIDIA A40. We use Spacy for argument head detection. The initial conformal generation risk threshold is determined by a randomly sampled calibration set from the training set. And the conformal cali-bration is conducted by a frozen Flan-t5-xxl . For ED, the initial conformal generation risk ˆq0 is set to 1, with a decay rate β of 0.5. For EAE, the ini-tial conformal generation risk ˆq0 is set to 3, also with a decay rate of 0.5. All debates are capped at a maximum of three rounds. The initial cluster radius μ0 is constantly set to 1.35, and the radius decay factor λ is 0.9. 

5 Results and Discussion 

5.1 Main results 

The main results for ACE05 and CASIE are sum-marized in Table 1. Aligned with previous obser-vations, the performance gap persists between the proposed framework and advanced tuning-based methods. However, we emphasize that the gap is much smaller. For example on CASIE, the gap on ED shrinks by 17.9% of the SOTA SFT base-line, and the system gains absolute 19.9% F1 score gain on EAE over the Code4UIE baseline. The per-formance gain over Code4UIE comes from three key aspects: the multi-agent debate system that leverages active discussion among agents, the ef-fective utilization of ontology information, and the improved selection of relevant sentences. The de-tailed contribution of each component will be dis-cussed in Section 5.2. Regarding ontology usage, previous experimental results demonstrate consis-                

> 3Detailed description for Gemini-Pro is accessi-ble at https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/ get-started/tutorial?lang=python .
> 4Detailed description for GPT-3.5-turbo is acces-sible at https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/ gpt-3-5-turbo .
> 5The checkpoint is accessible at https://huggingface. co/google/flan-t5-xxl under Apache-2.0 license.

16427 Method Ontology usage Paradigm ACE05 CASIE                                                                                                        

> ED EAE EE ED EAE EE
> DEGREE (Hsu et al., 2022a) ✓SFT 73.3 73.5 55.8 ---
> InstructUIE (Wang et al., 2023b) ✓SFT 77.1 72.9 ----
> RexUIE (Liu et al., 2023) ëSFT 73.3 -57.3 73.0 -63.9
> ChatGPT-14 (Li et al., 2023a) ëZS 17.1 28.9 7.3 ---
> ChatIE (Wei et al., 2024) ëZS -29.5 ----
> ChatGPT-IE (Han et al., 2023) ëICL-5 27.3 31.6 13.8 18.2 27.4 19.0
> G-PTLM (Lin et al., 2023) ✓ZS -31.2 ----
> CODE 4S TRUCT (Wang et al., 2023c) ✓ZS -37.8 ----
> Code4UIE (Guo et al., 2023) ✓ICL-10 ∗37.4 57.0 21.3 28.7 -30.8
> DEBATE -EE (Gemini-GPT) ✓ICL-10 ∗50.2 59.5 30.6 41.8 59.3 40.5 DEBATE -EE (Llama3-GPT) ✓ICL-10 ∗50.7 56.0 31.5 38.9 53.7 37.4

Table 1: EE results on ACE05-E and CASIE. Bold numbers represent the highest score except for SFT approaches. (∗ denotes selective instances) 

tent performance gains when ontology information is utilized. Our experimental results indicate that integrating the entire ontology schema informa-tion into the prompts cannot guarantee an optimal comprehension of the event schema by LLMs. Ad-ditionally, retrieving event information only for the types mentioned by the debaters is more computa-tionally efficient. Comparing the two different settings of LLM engines, Gemini-GPT and Llama3-GPT, their per-formance on ACE05 is relatively close. However, Llama3-GPT shows less promising performance on CASIE. This discrepancy arises because both GPT and Llama3 tend to generate longer spans. In ACE05, triggers are predefined to be one token, allowing GPT and Llama3 to follow instructions without generating long spans for event triggers. However, for arguments in ACE05 and both trig-gers and arguments in CASIE, GPT and Llama3 generate longer spans. For example, in CASIE, the average span length for Gemini is 9.0 tokens, while it is 13.7 tokens for GPT and 13.0 tokens for Llama3. Given that the average ground truth length of argument spans is 10.4 tokens, the ar-gument spans generated by GPT and Llama3 are excessively long. Furthermore, we illustrate the evolution of the generation risk distribution throughout the debat-ing process in Figure 2. The risk is measured by the calibration model, indicating the confidence (expressed by negative likelihood) of the LM gen-erating the accurate answer given the input sen-tence and retrieved information. Initially, the risk distribution shows less confidence in accurate an-swers, as only ICL examples are available. As the debate progresses and more examples are retrieved, the model becomes more confident, which aligns                                 

> Method Ontology Paradigm ED EAE
> ChatGPT-IE ëICL-5 27.3 31.6
> Code4UIE ✓ICL-10 ∗37.4 57.0
> DEBATE -EE ✓ICL-10 ∗50.2 59.5 - re-clustering ✓ICL-10 ∗45.1 55.0 - DRAG ✓ICL-5 39.9 52.8 - Calib ✓ICL-10 ∗40.6 57.3 - DRAG, Calib ✓ICL-5 36.8 49.4

Table 2: Abalation study results 

with the findings in (Kang et al., 2024). The risk distribution evolution visualizes the optimization of the event extraction outputs with the proposed retrieval module and validates the efficacy of the risk threshold decay strategy. 

5.2 Ablation Study 

To evaluate the effectiveness of each proposed mod-ule, an ablation study is conducted on ACE05 for 4 scenarios: without re-clustering, without the en-tire DRAG retrieval module, without AdaCP, and without both DRAG and AdaCP. The results are summarized in Table 2. From the ablation study results, we may con-clude that the integration of both the DRAG and AdaCP modules into a debating system signif-icantly enhances event extraction performance. Without the DRAG and AdaCP modules, the frame-work regresses to a basic debating system. How-ever, this basic system still outperforms baseline approaches. This superiority arises from the abil-ity of the debating system to capitalize on cross-examination capabilities among agents. Especially, the Critic agent gains the most effect during the cross-examination process. From 40 randomly sam-pled inferences from ACE05, the Critic improves 15% of the event trigger answers. 16428 (a) Before debate (ICL) (b) After 1st round debate (c) After 2nd round debate 

> Figure 2: Risk distribution evolution over the debate process

In the absence of the DRAG module, the system regress to retrieving the closest data entries in the semantic space as reference data. The observed substantial performance degradation emphasizes the critical importance of incorporating diverse ref-erences for event extraction. Example (a) in Table 4 demonstrates how the DRAG module effectively corrects the event trigger token from “holding” to “formerly”. Initially, the debater correctly identifies the event type as Personal:Start-Position , but mistakenly selects the verb “holding” as the event trigger. This is a common error in the first round of debate since early retrievals tend to favor verbs. Given the identified event type, more fine-grained reference data are retrieved, as shown in example (a), which helps correctly identify “formerly” as the trigger. This underscores the effectiveness of the precise retrieval powered by the DRAG module. Additionally, both ED and EAE show perfor-mance regression without the AdaCP module, es-pecially for ED. Example (b) in Table 4 illustrates a case where the AdaCP module successfully re-jects an incorrect ED result. Although the token "split" can imply a Life:Divorce event, the re-trieved event definition "officially divorced under the legal definition of divorce" impacts the calibra-tion model’s confidence in its detection, success-fully disambiguating it from a valid event mention. This example underscores the importance of the AdaCP in maintaining high detection accuracy. 

5.3 Case Study 

The imperative for comprehensive argument extrac-tion evaluation is underscored by our observations. While LLMs tend to identify longer spans than annotated arguments, this phenomenon does not necessarily reflect increased human-likeness in re-sponses (Han et al., 2023). Rather, it often stems from underlying confusion regarding argument role spans. Most prior supervised methods rely on eval-uating exact matches of the head token of argument spans, owing to the challenges associated with as-sessing the entire argument extent. However, such an approach can yield inferior evaluations. Con-sider example (a) in Table 3, where the argument extent of an Entity involved in the Contact:Meet 

event encompasses “the South Korean, Japanese, Russian, and Australian as well as other govern-ments”, with the head token being “governments”. Existing evaluations based solely on the head token may overlook the nuanced understanding captured by the framework, which correctly predicts all gov-ernments attending the talks. Thus, we advocate considering the entire argument’s extent for precise evaluation, especially in the era of LLMs. Token-level over-inference poses a challenge to the accuracy of current evaluation systems, partic-ularly in reflecting the correctness of answers in-ferred from contextual clues. Consider example (b), where the correct argument role should encompass a word span from the original context. In this in-stance, the annotated argument role is “Hawaiian”, while the predicted answer is “Hawaii”. Although the answer is derived from the word “Hawaiian”, it does not correspond to a valid token from the original sentence. This observation underscores the necessity for more reference annotations in the event extraction task. By providing richer contex-tual cues, additional reference annotations can help mitigate token-level over-inference and enhance the precision of evaluations. In the context of example (c), the framework demonstrates accurate prediction of the victims of the Life:Die event (regardless of the span con-fusion mentioned in (a)), encompassing “men”, “women”, and “children”. However, it overpredicts the target of the war as “innocent children, women, and men”. Despite encountering numerous exam-ples with closely aligned semantic meanings, in-cluding instances where the trigger token is also 16429 ID Text Conversations GTH (a) McCarthy was formerly a top civil servant at the Department of Trade and Industry.            

> Debater: ["Personnel:Start-Position", "holding"] Retrieval: -Example: "... and his successor as house majority whip and his former deputy ..." Answer : ["Personnel:End-Position", "former"] ["Personnel:End-Position", "for-merly"] (b) The celebrity couple spit up very publicly four years ago and each has since had well-publicized relationships with others .
> Debater: ["Life:Divorce", "split"] DRAG : Life:Divorce: officially divorced under the legal definition of divorce AdaCalib (Answer fails calibration) Answer : [] []

Table 3: Examples illustrating the effect of DRAG and AdaCalib (Conversations are truncated for illustration).                     

> ID Text GTH Predictions (a) " We are studying that plan, we are examining it with our friends and allies, " Powell said, adding that talks [Con-tact:Meet] were now underway with the South Korean, Japanese, Russian and Australian as well as other governments. Entity: governments Entity: South Korean, Japanese, Russian, Aus-tralian, governments (b) The premier of the western Canadian province of British Columbia pleaded no contest to driving drunk during a Hawai-ian vacation [Movement:Transport] in January. Destination: Hawaiian Destination: Hawaii (c) Does the threat posed by the Iraqi dictator justify a war [Life:Attack] , which is sure to kill[Life:Die] thousands of innocent children, women and men ? [Life:Die] Victim: men, Victim: women, Victim: children [Life:Attack] Target: innocent children, women and men; [Life:Die] Victim: thousands of innocent children, women and men

Table 4: Evaluation gap for LLMs (a-b) and challenging examples (c). 

“war”, the system struggles to differentiate between the target for the “war” event and individuals af-fected by the “war”. It highlights that the current guidelines and contextual examples remain insuf-ficient to fully address the reasoning behind such occurrences. 

6 Conclusion 

This work introduces a novel multi-agent debate paradigm that resembles the optimization process. This debate model is conceptualized as an optimiza-tion mechanism wherein supporting information is systematically retrieved to regulate the distribution of risk. The evolution of risk distribution through-out the debating process illustrates how the integra-tion of the adaptive conformal prediction module and the diverse RAG module can progressively steer the risk distribution towards more confident answers. Through this framework, the debate pro-cess becomes not just a discourse but a strategic endeavor aimed at achieving optimal outcomes. 

Limitations 

In this work, we found that leveraging multi-agent debating to iteratively refine the event extraction output without tuning LLMs leads to significant performance gains for LLM-based in-context learn-ing (ICL) on event extraction. We are particularly excited about the system’s ability to effortlessly adapt to new domains or ontologies. However, com-pared to previous zero-shot or ICL event extraction approaches, our proposed system requires multiple rounds of LLM inferences, increasing both infer-ence time and cost. We welcome follow-up work and optimization, as we believe many of these is-sues can be addressed. 

Acknowledgements 

This research is partially supported by the award No. 2238940 from the Faculty Early Career De-velopment Program (CAREER), the award No. 2329603 from the Small Business Innovation Re-search Program (SBIR) of the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the U.S. DARPA FoundSci Program #HR00112490370. The views and conclu-sions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily represent-ing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copy-right annotation therein. 

References 

David Ahn. 2006. The stages of event extraction. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Annotating and Reasoning about Time and Events, pages 1–8. AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card. 16430 Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Em-manuel J. Candès, Michael I. Jordan, and Lihua Lei. 2022. Learn then test: Calibrating predic-tive algorithms to achieve risk control. Preprint, arXiv:2110.01052. Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin John-son, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark, Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gau-rav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Gar-cia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hur-witz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagiel-ski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Ben-jamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nys-trom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Au-rko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wiet-ing, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. 2023. Palm 2 technical report. Preprint, arXiv:2305.10403. Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learn-ing to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. Stephen Bates, Anastasios Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael Jordan. 2021. Distribution-free, risk-controlling prediction sets. J. ACM, 68(6). Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-ers. Preprint, arXiv:2005.14165. Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2023. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. Preprint, arXiv:2308.07201. Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2024. Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation. In Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada, pages 17754–17762. AAAI Press. Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu, Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, Yujia Qin, Xin Cong, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Jie Zhou. 2023. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent behav-iors. Preprint, arXiv:2308.10848. Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Xi Chen, Pat Verga, and William Cohen. 2022. MuRAG: Multimodal retrieval-augmented generator for open question an-swering over images and text. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5558–5570, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Nancy Chinchor and Elaine Marsh. 1998. Muc-7 in-formation extraction task definition. In Proceeding of the seventh message understanding conference (MUC-7), Appendices, pages 359–367. Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vin-odkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, An-drew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pil-lai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy 16431 Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. 2022. Palm: Scaling language mod-eling with pathways. Preprint, arXiv:2204.02311. Xinya Du and Claire Cardie. 2020. Event extraction by answering (almost) natural questions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 671– 683, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. 2023. Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. Preprint, arXiv:2305.14325. Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. 2023. Improving language model negotiation with self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback. Preprint, arXiv:2305.10142. A. Gammerman, V. Vovk, and V. Vapnik. 1998. Learning by transduction. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’98, page 148–155, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. Jun Gao, Huan Zhao, Changlong Yu, and Ruifeng Xu. 2023. Exploring the feasibility of chatgpt for event extraction. Preprint, arXiv:2303.03836. Michael Glass, Gaetano Rossiello, Md Faisal Mahbub Chowdhury, Ankita Naik, Pengshan Cai, and Al-fio Gliozzo. 2022. Re2G: Retrieve, rerank, gen-erate. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 2701–2715, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ralph Grishman. 1997. Information extraction: Tech-niques and challenges. In International summer school on information extraction, pages 10–27. Springer. Yucan Guo, Zixuan Li, Xiaolong Jin, Yantao Liu, Yu-tao Zeng, Wenxuan Liu, Xiang Li, Pan Yang, Long Bai, Jiafeng Guo, et al. 2023. Retrieval-augmented code generation for universal information extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02962. Ridong Han, Tao Peng, Chaohao Yang, Benyou Wang, Lu Liu, and Xiang Wan. 2023. Is information extrac-tion solved by chatgpt? an analysis of performance, evaluation criteria, robustness and errors. Preprint, arXiv:2305.14450. I-Hung Hsu, Kuan-Hao Huang, Elizabeth Boschee, Scott Miller, Prem Natarajan, Kai-Wei Chang, and Nanyun Peng. 2022a. DEGREE: A data-efficient generation-based event extraction model. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 1890–1908, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. I-Hung Hsu, Kuan-Hao Huang, Elizabeth Boschee, Scott Miller, Prem Natarajan, Kai-Wei Chang, and Nanyun Peng. 2022b. Degree: A data-efficient gen-erative event extraction model. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL). Zhengbao Jiang, Frank Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active re-trieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7969–7992, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. James Robins Jing Lei and Larry Wasserman. 2013. Distribution-free prediction sets. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 108(501):278–287. PMID: 25237208. Mintong Kang, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Ning Yu, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. 2024. C-rag: Certified genera-tion risks for retrieval-augmented language models. Preprint, arXiv:2402.03181. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Bo Li, Gexiang Fang, Yang Yang, Quansen Wang, Wei Ye, Wen Zhao, and Shikun Zhang. 2023a. Evaluating chatgpt’s information extraction capabilities: An as-sessment of performance, explainability, calibration, and faithfulness. Preprint, arXiv:2304.11633. Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jingyuan Wang, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023b. The web can be your oyster for improving language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 728–746, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng Tu, and Shuming Shi. 2023. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent debate. Preprint, arXiv:2305.19118. Ying Lin, Heng Ji, Fei Huang, and Lingfei Wu. 2020. A joint neural model for information ex-traction with global features. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7999–8009, On-line. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zizheng Lin, Hongming Zhang, and Yangqiu Song. 2023. Global constraints with prompting for zero-shot event argument classification. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 16432 2023, pages 2527–2538, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Linguistic Data Consortium. 2005. English anno-tation guidelines for events. https://www.ldc. upenn.edu/sites/www.ldc.upenn.edu/files/ english-events-guidelines-v5.4.3.pdf. 

Chengyuan Liu, Fubang Zhao, Yangyang Kang, Jingyuan Zhang, Xiang Zhou, Changlong Sun, Kun Kuang, and Fei Wu. 2023. RexUIE: A recur-sive method with explicit schema instructor for uni-versal information extraction. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 15342–15359, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yubo Ma, Yixin Cao, Yong Hong, and Aixin Sun. 2023. Large language model is not a good few-shot informa-tion extractor, but a good reranker for hard samples! In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 10572–10601, Sin-gapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2023a. Chatgpt: Openai’s language model. https://openai.com/chatgpt . Accessed: November 10, 2023. OpenAI. 2023b. Gpt-3: Openai’s language model. Ac-cessed: November 10, 2023. Available at https: //www.openai.com/ .OpenAI. 2023c. Gpt-4 is openai’s most advanced sys-tem, producing safer and more useful responses. Ac-cessed: November 10, 2023. Available at https: //openai.com/gpt-4 .Chaoxu Pang, Yixuan Cao, Qiang Ding, and Ping Luo. 2023. Guideline learning for in-context information extraction. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 15372–15389, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interac-tive simulacra of human behavior. Preprint, arXiv:2304.03442. Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Wei Liu, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2023. Communicative agents for software development. Preprint, arXiv:2307.07924. Victor Quach, Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Adam Yala, Jae Ho Sohn, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Regina Barzi-lay. 2024. Conformal language modeling. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. Taneeya Satyapanich, Francis Ferraro, and Timothy W. Finin. 2020. Casie: Extracting cybersecurity event information from text. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. 2008. A tutorial on conformal prediction. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 9:371–421. Shamane Siriwardhana, Rivindu Weerasekera, Elliott Wen, Tharindu Kaluarachchi, Rajib Rana, and Suranga Nanayakkara. 2023. Improving the do-main adaptation of retrieval augmented generation (RAG) models for open domain question answering. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:1–17. Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Stephanie Strassel, Tom Riese, Justin Mott, Joe Ellis, Jonathan Wright, Seth Kulick, Neville Ryant, and Xiaoyi Ma. 2015. From light to rich ere: annotation of entities, relations, and events. In Proceedings of the the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 89–98. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023a. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. Preprint, arXiv:2302.13971. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023b. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. Preprint, arXiv:2307.09288. Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. 2005. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. David Wadden, Ulme Wennberg, Yi Luan, and Han-naneh Hajishirzi. 2019. Entity, relation, and event extraction with contextualized span represen-tations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 5784–5789, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. 16433 Haotian Wang, Xiyuan Du, Weijiang Yu, Qianglong Chen, Kun Zhu, Zheng Chu, Lian Yan, and Yi Guan. 2023a. Apollo’s oracle: Retrieval-augmented reasoning in multi-agent debates. Preprint, arXiv:2312.04854. Sijia Wang, Mo Yu, Shiyu Chang, Lichao Sun, and Lifu Huang. 2022. Query and extract: Refining event extraction as type-oriented binary decoding. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 169–182, Dublin, Ire-land. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiao Wang, Weikang Zhou, Can Zu, Han Xia, Tianze Chen, Yuansen Zhang, Rui Zheng, Junjie Ye, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, Jihua Kang, Jingsheng Yang, Siyuan Li, and Chunsai Du. 2023b. Instructuie: Multi-task instruction tuning for unified information extraction. Preprint, arXiv:2304.08085. Xingyao Wang, Sha Li, and Heng Ji. 2023c. Code4Struct: Code generation for few-shot event structure prediction. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3640–3663, Toronto, Canada. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Xiang Wei, Xingyu Cui, Ning Cheng, Xiaobin Wang, Xin Zhang, Shen Huang, Pengjun Xie, Jinan Xu, Yufeng Chen, Meishan Zhang, Yong Jiang, and Wenjuan Han. 2024. Chatie: Zero-shot informa-tion extraction via chatting with chatgpt. Preprint, arXiv:2302.10205. Di Wu, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Dejiao Zhang, Murali Kr-ishna Ramanathan, and Xiaofei Ma. 2024. Repo-former: Selective retrieval for repository-level code completion. Preprint, arXiv:2403.10059. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2023. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm ap-plications via multi-agent conversation. Preprint, arXiv:2308.08155. Yachong Yang and Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla. 2024. Se-lection and aggregation of conformal prediction sets. Preprint, arXiv:2104.13871. Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2023. Repocoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and generation. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher De-wan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mi-haylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. Preprint, arXiv:2205.01068. Gang Zhao, Xiaocheng Gong, Xinjie Yang, Guant-ing Dong, Shudong Lu, and Si Li. 2023. De-moSG: Demonstration-enhanced schema-guided gen-eration for low-resource event extraction. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Shi Qiu, Jintian Zhang, Jing Chen, Ruipu Wu, Shuai Wang, Shiding Zhu, Jiyu Chen, Wentao Zhang, Xiangru Tang, Ningyu Zhang, Huajun Chen, Peng Cui, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023. Agents: An open-source framework for autonomous language agents. Preprint, arXiv:2309.07870. 

A Inference Cost 

The average inference time for each sentence is approximately 10 seconds, with a cost of less than $0.01 per sentence, depending on the API inference time and cost for the LLM agents. We acknowl-edge that this cost is relatively high compared to small PLMs or LLM-based ICL approaches. The additional cost, compared to previous LLM base-lines, arises from the multiple rounds of debates necessary for discussing and refining the LLM so-lution based on retrieved knowledge and potential errors identified by the critic agent. The additional cost, compared to small PLM baselines, represents a tradeoff between the extensive time and effort required for developing and tuning small PLMs versus the inference cost. Especially when gener-alizing to new domains, additional time and effort are required to adapt to the target domain, while the proposed system can be employed without tuning. Despite the higher cost, our system offers signifi-cant advantages in adaptability and efficiency, mak-ing it a valuable investment for handling diverse information extraction tasks. 

B Detailed Prompts 

Debater Prompt for ED Consider the sentence: "[SENT]". Carefully read the event definition, event type, and trigger tokens in the given examples. Examine whether it mentions any possible event from the provided list. If no events are mentioned, respond with "[]". If an event are mentioned, deter-mine the event type from the list. Then identify the event trigger, which is **one word** closely asso-ciated with the occurrence of a pre-defined event type. Respond in the format **[ROLE]: ["event type", "trigger token"]**, or **[ROLE]: []** if no event trigger is identified. 

Debater Prompt for EAE/EE Give a sentence: **[SENT]**, it contains an event mention. The 16434 event type is **{event type}**, and the event is triggered by the token **{trigger}**. Now let’s focus on the Argument Extraction task. The list of argument roles corresponding to the event type **{event type}** is **{role list}**. Event argu-ments are entities that directly relate to the event mention. Please extract the event arguments of the above sentence according to the argument roles, and return them in the form of a table. The header of the table is | event type | argument role | argu-ment content |. If no entity in the sentence plays the corresponding argument role, its argument content returns **None**. 

Critic Prompt for ED Review the given sen-tence: ¨ [SENT] ¨. Thoroughly evaluate the event definitions, typical triggers, listed examples, and responses from Debater A and Debater B. For de-baters’ answers, rigorously examine: Is there an event mention? Does the identified event trigger indeed express an occurrence of the identified event type, based on the event definition? Does the iden-tified trigger align with typical triggers and the ex-amples provided? Considering the valid examples, is there a more suitable trigger token to express the event? Provide concise assessments. 

Critic Prompt for EAE/EE Remember the given sentence: **[SENT]**. Now, please judge critically and identify possible errors. Do the identi-fied argument roles correctly match the entity men-tions? Are there extra or missing argument roles, or misclassified argument roles? Please reply con-cisely. 

Judge Prompt for ED If all agents state there is no event mention involved, reply **No event**. If all agents have agree with the same event type and event trigger answers, respond in a table. The header of the table is | event type | event trigger |. If there is any disagreement in responses, re-spond with **No agreement, debate continues** to encourage further discussion to resolve the dif-ferences. 

Judge Prompt for EAE/EE If debaters agree with each other, reply the event arguments in the form of a table. The header of the table is | event type | argument role | argument content |. If no argument role has a corresponding argument con-tent, the argument content returns **None**. If debaters disagree on any argument content, require reply: **Disagreement observed, debate contin-ues**. Make sure reply only a table or **Disagree-ment observed, debate continues** 16435