Title: 2024.findings-emnlp.672.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.672.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 10 Nov 2024 15:23:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 11501–11507 November 12-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics Consistent Document-Level Relation Extraction via Counterfactuals 

Ali Modarressi 1,2 Abdullatif Köksal 1,2 Hinrich Schütze 1,21Center for Information and Language Processing, LMU Munich, Germany 

> 2

Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany 

amodaresi@cis.lmu.de 

Abstract 

Many datasets have been developed to train and evaluate document-level relation extraction (RE) models. Most of these are constructed us-ing real-world data. It has been shown that RE models trained on real-world data suffer from factual biases. To evaluate and address this issue, we present C OV ER ED, a counterfac-tual data generation approach for document-level relation extraction datasets using entity replacement . We first demonstrate that mod-els trained on factual data exhibit inconsistent behavior: while they accurately extract triples from factual data, they fail to extract the same triples after counterfactual modification. This inconsistency suggests that models trained on factual data rely on spurious signals such as spe-cific entities and external knowledge – rather than on the input context – to extract triples. We show that by generating document-level counterfactual data with C OV ER ED and train-ing models on them, consistency is maintained with minimal impact on RE performance. We release our C OV ER ED pipeline 1 as well as R E-DOC RED-CF, a dataset of counterfactual RE documents, to assist in evaluating and address-ing inconsistency in document-level RE. 

1 Introduction 

Relation extraction (RE) extracts triples, seman-tic relations between two entities, from text. In document-level RE, triples can span multiple sen-tences (Yao et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2022b; Xiaoyan et al., 2023). RE datasets such as DocRED (Yao et al., 2019) and Re-DocRED (Tan et al., 2022b) consist of a factual corpus (Wikipedia) annotated with triples. Most recent DocRE models are based on pretrained language models (PLMs) (Tang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2022a) trained on these datasets. While PLMs perform strongly, they are susceptible to factual biases and other spu-rious correlations. To generate triples, instead of 

> 1

https://github.com/amodaresi/CovEReD Original Document: The Eminem Show is the fourth studio album by American rapper Eminem , released on May 26, 2002 by Aftermath Entertainment , Shady Records , and Interscope Records. The Eminem Show includes the commercially successful singles "Without Me ", " Cleanin' Out My Closet ", " Superman ", and " Sing for the Moment ". The Eminem Show reached number one…                                    

> RE Model Prediction (TP): (Cleanin' Out My Closet, part of, The Eminem Show)
> Counterfactual Document w. Entity Replacement: London Calling is the fourth studio album by American rapper Marilyn Manson ,released on May 26, 2002 by
> Volcom Entertainment ,Track Records ,and Interscope Records. London Calling includes the commercially successful singles "Coco ", "The Ultimate Collection ", "Watching You ", and " Déjà Vu ". London Calling reached number one…
> Missed Prediction (FN): (The Ultimate Collection, part of, London Calling)

Figure 1: Document from Re-DocRED (Tan et al., 2022b) and counterfactual version generated with entity replacement. A model trained on factual data extracts the original triple, but fails on its counterfactual (CF) counterpart. Thus, the model is relying on spurious patterns such as entity biases. We address this by gener-ating CF data and training RE models on them. 

inferring from the input, they may use their para-metric knowledge (McCoy et al., 2019; Kaushik et al., 2020; Paranjape et al., 2022). A common case is entity bias: the model relies on entities in its parametric knowledge to make a prediction (Long-pre et al., 2021; Qian et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). Wang et al. (2022) perform a counterfactual anal-ysis (CoRE) for sentence-level RE. They remove the context and provide only the entity mentions. They then distil the biases and propose a debiasing method using a causal graph. ENTRE (Wang et al., 2023), a counterfactual modification of TACRED (Zhang et al., 2017), replaces entities to develop a robust sentence-level RE benchmark. They show 

11501 that RE models rely on memorized facts instead of the sentence context. All of this work is focused on sentence-level RE. This paper presents C OV ER ED, a counterfactual (CF) data generation method for document-level 

RE. It replaces entities and thereby generates text containing triples with minimal factual alignment. We apply C OV ER ED to Re-DocRED, creating R E-DOC RED-CF, a counterfactual document-level RE dataset. Since we apply replacements on the document level, our method handles multiple entity mentions and also multiple replacements at a time – unlike sentence-level methods. We achieve this by considering all triples that an entity is involved in and embeddings of its contexts. Evaluation on R E-DOC RED-CF allows us to measure how consistent a model is in RE. We show that models trained on factual documents lack robustness against nonfac-tual data (Figure 1). We then train an RE model on Re-DocRED and R E-D OC RED-CF and show that it has high consistency with only a negligible effect on accuracy on factual data. Our approach is novel in that it creates counterfactual datasets on the doc-ument level – the level at which RE is used in a real application – to analyze and improve DocRE models. Alongside C OV ER ED, the data generation pipeline, we release R E-D OC RED-CF, a counter-factual dataset generated from Re-DocRED. 

2 Counterfactual pipeline and dataset 

To evaluate and address robustness against factu-ality bias, we need to generate documents from which such biases have been removed. Hence, in this section we describe C OV ER ED, our mech-anism for generating counterfactual (CF) docu-ments from a document-level RE dataset. Our seed dataset is Re-DocRED (Tan et al., 2022b). For each Re-DocRED document d, we have a set of entities 

E and a set of relation triples R. For each entity node ei ∈ E, the dataset provides the positioning of each mention of ei and its type (ORG, TIME . . . ). In a triple r ∈ R, we have the indices ( i)of head and tail entities, the relation rt and – if the triple comes from the original DocRED (Yao et al., 2019) – the IDs of the sentences that are the evidence for r.To generate counterfactuals from Re-DocRED’s documents, our pipeline C OV ER ED proceeds with the following three steps (§2.1–§2.3). 

2.1 Entity mention cleanup 

If two entities ei and ej share a common (ex-actly matching) mention, then we merge them; this means that we merge the two sets of mentions and treat ei and ej as synonymous. Also, if two men-tions overlap in a sentence, we discard the shorter one and only keep the longer one. Example: If “Great Britain” in a sentence is annotated with two mentions “Great Britain” and “Britain”, then we only keep “Great Britain”. 

2.2 Gathering entity candidates 

In sentence-level RE, entities are very rarely part of multiple triples, but in document-level RE this is common. If we want to generate consistent coun-terfactual documents, we have to replace all of an entity’s occurrences. This makes it impractical to use simplistic replacement methods in document-level RE – such as relying on an entity bank for random replacement as in ENTRE (Wang et al., 2023). Another challenge is that we need “plausi-ble” counterfactual documents that do not obvi-ously contradict general knowledge. For example, “Obama was born in Panthera leo” (where Panthera leo is a species, the lion) is too implausible to teach the model about correct RE. We therefore only re-place ei with ej if they have (i) similar relation maps and (ii) similar context snippets . For this step, we use the set of entities over the entire seed dataset. The relation map for an entity ei is a set of pairs, each consisting of a relation and the position of ei

within that relation (head or tail). For example, the relation map of “United States” – occurring in triples such as ⟨NBA , country , United States ⟩ –may contain the pair (country , tail ). If two entities 

ei and ej have similar relation maps, then ei is a good candidate for replacing ej since they occur in similar triples. The context snippet of a mention m includes up to 16 words on each side of m. For each context snippet, we compute its embedding (using Con-triever (Izacard et al., 2022)). If two entities ei and 

ej have similar context embeddings (as measured by cosine similarity), then ei is a good candidate for replacing ej since they occur in similar contexts. 

2.3 Generating counterfactual documents 

Our general approach to generating counterfactual documents is to find suitable entity alternatives for 11502 each entity node and apply replacements. In Algorithm 1, function G ET ALTS is responsi-ble for finding suitable entity replacements. For each entity node, we compare its features (its type, relation map, mention and context snippet embed-dings; see §2.2) with the candidates – the other entity nodes in the pool E gathered from the doc-ument collection. We deem a candidate a suitable alternative if it is similar and not from the same document. We do not want candidates’s entity men-tions (as measured by cosine similarity of the em-beddings of the entity mention strings) to be too similar; e.g., “United States” vs “U.S.”. The reason is that we of course want the candidate to be a dif-ferent entity. G ET ALTS returns a list of sets, each containing, for a particular alternative entity ei,possible mention strings for ei. For instance, if the entity node we want to replace is “United States”, an example mention set is {“United Kingdom”, “UK”, “Britain” }. For more details see Appendix A. To generate counterfactual documents from the seed document d, we loop over all entity nodes in d.We attempt to apply replacements for each entity node. To achieve this, we first create an empty dic-tionary – denoted as D – for our newly generated documents (each created through replacements). After having replaced an entity node, we add the re-sulting counterfactual document to this dictionary. We use EditTuple to record which nodes have been replaced, preventing any node from being replaced more than once. We repeatedly loop over the dic-tionary to gather a large number of counterfactual documents. After the replacement process is com-pleted, we select those counterfactual documents that are affected by the replacement more than a threshold τr. Thus, we require that a valid counter-factual document have at least τr percent of their triples altered (in either one or both entities). 

3 Experiments 

We generate R E-D OC RED-CF, our counterfactual dataset, from Re-DocRED using C OV ER ED. We run C OV ER ED five times on Re-DocRED train to produce R E-D OC RED-CF train (so it consists of five different counterfactual datasets). We run COV ER ED on Re-DocRED test once to gener-ate R E-D OC RED-CF test. We set τe[MAX] = .8,

τe[MIN] = .2, τc = .4, MN = 3 (to limit the search) 

> 2For each replacement the closest mention to the original mentions, in terms of embedding similarity would be selected.

Algorithm 1 Counterfactual Example Generator                                                                        

> Input:
> d: Document with entity nodes and relation triples
> τr: Affected relations threshold—An augmented doc-ument should have more than τrof its relations affected by the replacements
> MN: Maximum number of alternatives to sample from
> Output:
> D: A set of documents with entity replacements ap-plied on d
> Auxiliary functions:
> REPLACE (i,d,alt ): A function that replaces node (i) and its mentions in the document ( d) with a given alternative entity mentions set ( alt ). 2
> AFFECT R(EditTuple, d): This function returns the ra-tio of relation triples that are affected by the replacements specified in the EditTuple. GET ALTS (ei,E,τe[MAX] ,τe[MIN] ,τc): This function re-turns a list of sets of alternatives for the given entity node
> ei. It requires the candidates pool E, and other sets of hyperparameters (cf. Appendix A). 1: Initialize D← {} , EditTuple ←() ,D ← [ ]
> 2: D[EditTuple ]←d
> 3: for EditTuple, ˜din Ddo
> 4: for eiin ˜d[EntityNodes ]do
> 5: if i / ∈EditTuple then
> 6: alts ←GET ALTS (ei,E,τe[MAX] ,τe[MIN] ,τc)7: Sample alt from alts [: MN]
> 8: Add ito EditTuple 9: D[EditTuple ]←REPLACE (i,˜d,alt )10: end if
> 11: end for
> 12: end for
> 13: for EditTuple, ˜din Ddo
> 14: if AFFECT R(EditTuple, d) > τrthen
> 15: Add ˜dto D
> 16: end if
> 17: end for
> 18: return D

and (to make sure at least 70% of triples are af-fected by the replacements) τr = .7.We first evaluate the hypothesis that models that are trained merely on factual data do not reliably use the context for the RE task. To test this, we measure how consistent these models are for docu-ments that have undergone entity replacement. We use the KD-DocRE framework (Tan et al., 2022a) 3

to train DocRE models. The framework features axial attention modules, adaptive focal loss and knowledge distillation over the distant supervised examples. As we want to observe the effect of us-ing counterfactual data in training, we do not use knowledge distillation and only do their first stage of training over the human-annotated data. We follow Tan et al. (2022a)’s setup and hyper-parameters in finetuning a RoBERTa-large model (Liu et al., 2019) for relation extraction. First, 

> 3https://github.com/tonytan48/KD-DocRE

11503 Training Data PRC REC F1 CONS             

> Re-DocRED 88.1 69.8 78.0 68.6 CF Only 85.3 62.8 72.4 89.5
> Re-DocRED + CF 85.7 68.8 76.3 88.3
> Table 1: Evaluation results on factual (Re-DocRED), counterfactual (CF Only) and combined (Re-DocRED + CF) data. Our measures are Precision (PRC), Recall (REC) and F1 score on Re-DocRED’s test set. Using a counterfactual counterpart of the test set, we report con-sistency (CONS) results of each approach. (All reported numbers are the median over 5 runs with different ran-dom seeds.)

with the training set of Re-DocRED, we finetune a model that we probe for factual biases. To mitigate random errors, we train with five random seeds and report the median over each metric. To assess a model’s factual bias, we need to observe how its behavior changes when presented with counterfactual data. Following Paranjape et al. (2022), we use pairwise consistency as our measure. Pairwise consistency is the accuracy of the model on those counterfactuals whose factual counterparts (the original facts) were predicted correctly. 

3.1 Results 

Table 1 shows performance of the trained mod-els on Re-DocRED test. As expected, the model that is only trained on factual data performs well on similar factual data. However, it only shows 68.6% consistency (for Re-DocRED test and R E-DOC RED-CF test) – more than 30% of the cor-rectly predicted output is based on entity and fac-tual biases. Figure 1 shows the original text (top) and the text after replacement of entities (bottom). We see that C OV ER ED, our replacement algorithm, did a good job here: the original entities were re-placed with similar entities (which occur in similar contexts and with similar relations), but of course the new triples are nonfactual. The model correctly predicted the triple (Cleanin’ Out My Closet, part of, The Eminem Show) from the original document. However, for the document with replaced entities – even though the relation (“part of”) is still the same, only the entities have changed – the model fails to extract the correct triple, which would be: (The Ultimate Collection, part of, London Calling). See Appendix B for more examples. This result corroborates other similar analysis that was done on the sentence level (Wang et al., 2022, 2023). To evaluate the effectiveness of C OV ER ED in generating plausible examples, we conducted a human evaluation on a sample subset of the data. We randomly selected 50 triplets from the test set and found that 45 of them were deemed plausible. This indicates that 90 percent of the counterfac-tual triplets accurately reflect relationships that are evident from the counterfactual version of the doc-ument. 4

Our hypothesis is that we can increase robust-ness against entity and factual biases by training on counterfactual data. We finetune a separate model with its own separate random seed for each of the five parts of R E-D OC RED-CF train. Table 1 shows that consistency increases with a >20% gap compared to only using factual data (89.5% vs 68.6%). This shows that counterfactuals improve the model’s robustness against entity and factual biases. However, training on counterfactuals only also deteriorates performance on factual test data (5.6 drop on F1, 72.4 vs 78.0). Since the real-world use case of DocRE models is factual data, we need to devise a solution that is both performant and consistent. Therefore, we conduct a third experiment in which we mix each of the five subsets of R E-DOC RED-CF train with Re-DocRED train. To keep the number of training steps equal, we halve the number of epochs of training that we used in the other two experiments ( 30 → 15 ). As shown in Table 1, the resulting model shows both a high performance with minimum drop in F1 (only -1.7, 76.3 vs 78.0) while also being consistent (88.3% vs 68.6% for the “factual-training-only” model). This means that the counterfactual R E-D OC RED-CF dataset helps the model to learn the task based on the context and mitigates bias issues while hav-ing the factual dataset alongside keeps the model performant on factual data. 

4 Conclusion 

In this work, we present a method for generating counterfactual examples for document-level rela-tion extraction. Our approach searches for suitable entity replacements over a document and applies them to a point where most of the relations are affected by these replacements. By generating a counterfactual test set, we demonstrate the high 

> 4For this evaluation, we excluded counterfactual examples where the original counterparts were already mislabelled (e.g., due to entity linking errors or misannotation of non-evident relations). This ensures that our analysis focuses on evaluating the plausibility of our pipeline on correctly labeled examples.

11504 level of inconsistency DocRE model have when trained only with factual data. Adding counterfac-tuals to the training sets improves consistency by a large margin while keeping performance high. We make our pipeline C OV ER ED and dataset R E-DOC RED-CF publicly available We hope our find-ings and resources will raise awareness and support future efforts in addressing entity and factual biases in document relation extraction. 

Limitations 

The main limitation of this work is its requirement of a seed DocRE dataset. This means to extend this approach to either other domains or languages we need a document RE dataset provided. Here, we measured consistency and performance levels on KD-DocRE, one of the recent and high-performing methods. However, other solutions might yield dif-ferent performance results. Our aim in this work is to provide a document-level RE dataset for con-sistency. Also, the improvements in robustness against factual bias were gained in an equal setup. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was funded by Deutsche Forschungsge-meinschaft (Project SCHU 2246/14-1). 

References 

Haotian Chen, Bingsheng Chen, and Xiangdong Zhou. 2023. Did the models understand documents? benchmarking models for language understanding in document-level relation extraction. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 6418–6435, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebas-tian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2022. Unsupervised dense informa-tion retrieval with contrastive learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary Lipton. 2020. Learning the difference that makes a differ-ence with counterfactually-augmented data. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh. 2021. Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 7052–7063, Online and Punta Cana, Do-minican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuris-tics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 3428–3448, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Bhargavi Paranjape, Matthew Lamm, and Ian Tenney. 2022. Retrieval-guided counterfactual generation for QA. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1670–1686, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kun Qian, Ahmad Beirami, Zhouhan Lin, Ankita De, Alborz Geramifard, Zhou Yu, and Chinnadhurai Sankar. 2021. Annotation inconsistency and entity bias in MultiWOZ. In Proceedings of the 22nd An-nual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-course and Dialogue , pages 326–337, Singapore and Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qingyu Tan, Ruidan He, Lidong Bing, and Hwee Tou Ng. 2022a. Document-level relation extraction with adaptive focal loss and knowledge distillation. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2022 , pages 1672–1681, Dublin, Ire-land. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qingyu Tan, Lu Xu, Lidong Bing, Hwee Tou Ng, and Sharifah Mahani Aljunied. 2022b. Revisiting Do-cRED - addressing the false negative problem in re-lation extraction. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8472–8487, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Hengzhu Tang, Yanan Cao, Zhenyu Zhang, Jiangxia Cao, Fang Fang, Shi Wang, and Pengfei Yin. 2020. Hin: Hierarchical inference network for document-level relation extraction. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 24th Pacific-Asia Con-ference, PAKDD 2020, Singapore, May 11–14, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 24 , pages 197–209. Springer. Yiwei Wang, Muhao Chen, Wenxuan Zhou, Yujun Cai, Yuxuan Liang, Dayiheng Liu, Baosong Yang, Juncheng Liu, and Bryan Hooi. 2022. Should we rely on entity mentions for relation extraction? debi-asing relation extraction with counterfactual analysis. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 3071–3081, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yiwei Wang, Bryan Hooi, Fei Wang, Yujun Cai, Yuxuan Liang, Wenxuan Zhou, Jing Tang, Manjuan Duan, 11505 and Muhao Chen. 2023. How fragile is relation ex-traction under entity replacements? In Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) , pages 414–423, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhao Xiaoyan, Deng Yang, Yang Min, Wang Lingzhi, Zhang Rui, Cheng Hong, Lam Wai, Shen Ying, and Xu Ruifeng. 2023. A comprehensive survey on deep learning for relation extraction: Recent advances and new frontiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02051 .Nan Xu, Fei Wang, Bangzheng Li, Mingtao Dong, and Muhao Chen. 2022. Does your model classify en-tities reasonably? diagnosing and mitigating spuri-ous correlations in entity typing. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 8642–8658, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yuan Yao, Deming Ye, Peng Li, Xu Han, Yankai Lin, Zhenghao Liu, Zhiyuan Liu, Lixin Huang, Jie Zhou, and Maosong Sun. 2019. DocRED: A large-scale document-level relation extraction dataset. In Pro-ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , pages 764–777, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yuhao Zhang, Victor Zhong, Danqi Chen, Gabor Angeli, and Christopher D. Manning. 2017. Position-aware attention and supervised data improve slot filling. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 35–45, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Wenxuan Zhou, Kevin Huang, Tengyu Ma, and Jing Huang. 2021. Document-level relation extraction with adaptive thresholding and localized context pool-ing. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artifi-cial intelligence , volume 35, pages 14612–14620. 

A Alternative Entities Search Algorithm 

Algorithm 2 is the detailed pseudocode of our ap-proach in finding suitable alternatives for an entity node. 

B Extra Counterfactual Examples 

In Figure 2, we demonstrated three other examples of a factual bias failure of a DocRE model. Some examples also include relations that are spanning across multiple sentences which a DocRE model should be capable to extract. However, after en-tity replacement the model (which is trained only on factual data) only manages to predict on the original set. Original Document: Tippy Walker (born February 19, 1947) is a former                                                                             

> American child actress, best known for her role in the film The World of Henry Orient (1964). Born Elizabeth Tipton Walker in New York City , her father… After appearing in several television shows, such as Doctor Kildare and Peyton Place, and the female lead role in the film Jennifer on My Mind …
> RE Model Prediction (TP): (Doctor Kildare, cast member, Tippy Walker)
> Counterfactual Document w. Entity Replacement: Elizabeth Sterling Haynes (born February 19, 1947) is a former Canadian child actress, best known for her role in the film The World of Henry Orient (1964). Born Elizabeth in
> Amsterdam , her father… After appearing in several television shows, such as Doctor Kildare and Peyton Place, and the female lead role in the film Think Like a Man Too …
> Missed Prediction (FN): (Doctor Kildare, cast member, Elizabeth Sterling Haynes) Original Document: Watts Station is a train station built in 1904 in Watts , Los Angeles, California . It was one… and Long Beach. It was the only structure that remained intact when stores along 103rd Street in Watts were burned in the 1965 Watts Riots …
> RE Model Prediction (TP): (103rd Street, located in the administrative territorial entity, California)
> Counterfactual Document w. Entity Replacement: Oslo Airport Station is atrain station built in 1904 in
> Alabama , Los Angeles, Costa Mesa . It was one… and Long Beach. It was the only structure that remained intact when stores along 103rd Street in Alabama were burned in the 1965
> French Revolution …
> Missed Prediction (FN): (103rd Street, located in the administrative territorial entity, Costa Mesa) Original Document: James Whitman "Jim" McLamore (May 30, 1926 – August 9, 1996) was with David Edgerton responsible for the expansion of the Burger King fast food franchise… The pair sold the business to Pillsbury in 1967 and McLamore served as Burger King 's president until 1970 , and was…
> RE Model Prediction (TP): (Burger King, owned by, Pillsbury)
> Counterfactual Document w. Entity Replacement: Ellison (May 30, 1926 – August 9, 1996) was with David Edgerton responsible for the expansion of the Cheeseburger in Paradise fast food franchise… The pair sold the business to
> Orange S.A. in 1967 and Ellison served as Cheeseburger in Paradise 's president until 1970, and was…
> Missed Prediction (FN): (Cheeseburger in Paradise, owned by, Orange S.A.)

Figure 2: Three other examples of original documents and their counterfactual counterparts. In all three we observe a failure in predicting the counterfactual, while all information required for the relation to be extracted are present (Underlined). 11506 Algorithm 2 Find Suitable Alternatives for a given Entity Node ei

Input: 

ei: Input entity node 

E: Entity candidates pool 

τe[MAX] , τe[MIN] : Maximum and minimum entity men-tion similarity threshold 

τc: Context similarity threshold 

Output: 

E: List of sets of alternative entity mentions for the given entity node 1: function GET ALTS (ei,E,τe[MAX] ,τe[MIN] ,τc)2: Initialize: E ← [ ] , E′ ← [ ] 

3: for ˜e in E do 

4: rsim = |˜e[rel_maps ] ∩ ei[rel_maps ]|

5: if rsim = 0 then 

6: continue 

7: else if ˜e[doc_title ] = ei[doc_title ] then 

8: continue 

9: else if ˜e[type ] ∩ ei[type ] = ∅ then 

10: continue 

11: end if 

12: Set: msim ← 0

13: for mi in ei[mentions ], ˜m in ˜e[mentions ] do 

14: sim = cos( ˜ m[emb ], m i[emb ]) 

15: msim ← max( msim , sim )

16: end for 

17: Set: csim ← 0

18: for ci in ei[contexts ], ˜c in ˜e[contexts ] do 

19: sim = cos(˜ c[emb ], c i[emb ]) 

20: csim ← max( csim , sim )

21: end for 

22: if τe[MIN] < m sim < τ e[MAX] and τc < c sim then 

23: Add (˜ e, r sim , m sim , c sim ) to E′

24: end if 

25: end for 

26: Sort E′ by rsim , m sim , c sim 

27: for e in E′ do 

28: Add e[0][ mentions ] to E

29: end for 

30: Drop any set in E that is a subset of another set in E

31: return E

32: end function 11507