Title: 2024.findings-acl.737.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.737.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 29 Oct 2024 12:31:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 12388–12400 August 11-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics Enhanced Language Model Truthfulness with Learnable Intervention and Uncertainty Expression 

Farima Fatahi Bayat, Xin Liu, H. V. Jagadish, Lu Wang 

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor {farimaf, liuxincs, jag, wangluxy}@umich.edu 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) can generate long-form and coherent text, yet they often hal-lucinate facts, which undermines their relia-bility. To mitigate this issue, inference-time methods steer LLM representations toward the “truthful directions” previously learned for truth elicitation. However, applying these truthful di-rections with the same intensity fails to general-ize across different query contexts. We propose LITO, a Learnable Intervention method for Truthfulness Optimization that automatically identifies the optimal intervention intensity tai-lored to each specific context. LITO explores a sequence of model generations based on in-creasing levels of intervention intensities. It selects the most accurate response or refuses to answer when the predictions are highly un-certain. Experiments on multiple LLMs and question-answering datasets demonstrate that LITO improves truthfulness while preserving task accuracy. The adaptive nature of LITO counters the limitations of one-size-fits-all in-tervention methods, maximizing truthfulness by reflecting the model’s internal knowledge only when it is confident. Our code is available at https://github.com/launchnlp/LITO. 

1 Introduction 

Despite their impressive performance across a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, large language models (LLMs) still generate hal-lucinated outputs that lack real-world basis, lim-iting their reliability in critical applications that require truthful responses. Many promising direc-tions are explored to overcome this challenge, such as developing methods to ground LLMs in external knowledge and incorporate credibility indicators into model outputs (Gao et al., 2023; Fatahi Bayat et al., 2023). Another class of methods states the presence of a linear representation of “truth” in model activations (Marks and Tegmark, 2023; Li et al., 2023; Burns et al., 2022). These methods Hijab Hijab Hijab Hijab Burqa Janis Joplin Janis Joplin Janis Joplin kris kristoffer kris kristoffer Lipids Lipids Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan Israel Israel Israel Israel Israel 2015 2015 2015 2015 2016 What is the name of muslim dress? Who wrote the song Mercedes Benz? Bacterial cell walls are made rigid by the presence of? What flag is red and has a gold star? When did one child policy end in China?     

> 510 15 20 25
> intensity

Figure 1: Model responses using the inference-time intervention method with intensities increasing from 5 to 25. For different queries, the model achieves correct responses at varying intensity levels, indicated by green (correct) and red (incorrect) colors. Darkness of color represents the model’s confidence in its response. 

train linear probes on top of LLM’s internal activa-tions to identify truthful directions in their repre-sentation space. In particular, Burns et al. (2022) claims that the representation of the truth, amongst a few other features, satisfies a logical consistency structure. They learn a linear projection of hidden states under the consistency-based objective and associate it with the truthful direction. However, Farquhar et al. (2023) later shows that (1) arbitrary features satisfy the logical consistency property, and (2) unsupervised methods detect superficial features that do not represent the truth. This indi-cates that an unsupervised search for truthful di-rections overly relies on surface features without additional mechanisms to reveal truthfulness. To avoid capturing irrelevant features, Li et al. (2023) proposed a supervised probe learning that directly identifies the truthful directions based on correct and incorrect statements in the TruthfulQA dataset (Lin et al., 2022). This method, called inference-time intervention (ITI), trains supervised linear probes on the output of each attention head, treating the resulting probe weights as truthful di-rections. Additionally, a scaling coefficient is tuned 

12388 to determine the intensity at which each direction should be added to its respective head output at inference time. However, amplifying the truthful directions with a fixed single intensity does not gen-eralize across all contexts. Figure 1 demonstrates this by showing the Llama2-Chat-7B (Touvron et al., 2023b) model’s performance on answering various queries from the Natural Questions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) after applying the ITI technique with gradually increasing truthful direc-tion intensities. Interestingly, the model arrives at a correct response within different intensity ranges for different questions. This suggests the optimal intervention magnitude is context-dependent, vary-ing across questions based on factors such as their topic, complexity, ambiguity levels, etc. Moreover, the truthful directions may not capture all aspects of truthfulness. Therefore, adjusting the intensity alone cannot guarantee accurate responses. For instance, consider the question “What flag is red and has a gold star?” in Figure 1. Intervening with varying strengths of truthful directions does not result in a correct answer. In such cases, the model should express uncertainty to stay truthful. To address the limitations of one-size-fits-all in-tervention solutions by prior methods, we propose a Learnable Intervention method for Truthfulness 

Optimization, LITO . LITO identifies truthful di-rection intensities that suit different contexts, e.g., different questions. Given a sequence of model generations at multiple levels of intervention inten-sities, we develop a method to maximize truthful-ness, which we define as selecting factual responses when the model is highly confident and refusing to respond otherwise. To achieve this, we collect model responses, including textual outputs, hidden representations, and confidence values, at increas-ing levels of intervention intensity. We then train an LSTM-based classifier to assess the accuracy of these responses based on the sequence of hid-den states. During inference, the system selects the most accurate response if any is deemed accu-rate by the classifier; otherwise, it outputs “I have no comment” to express uncertainty and refuse to answer. We measure the performance of LITO and other methods in balancing truthfulness and accuracy, introducing a novel evaluation metric called the Truthfulness-Accuracy ( T A ) score. This metric evaluates the trade-off between truthfulness and task-specific accuracy by measuring how effec-tively different methods produce truthful outputs that appropriately acknowledge uncertainty while also achieving high accuracy on the target task. LITO is a learnable intervention methodology agnostic to the specific intervention method used, as long as the method can identify and apply truth-ful directions to the model’s internal representa-tions. In this paper, we instantiate LITO using the ITI method and extend its application to unsuper-vised truthful directions detected through represen-tation engineering (RepE) (Zou et al., 2023). We conduct comprehensive experiments across four datasets and two categories of language models: Llama and GPT-2. The results show that LITO significantly improves truthfulness while preserv-ing high task accuracy across different interven-tion methods. For example, using the ITI method, LITO boosts the T A score of Llama2-Chat-7B by 9.6 points on the Natural Questions dataset. Addi-tionally, we evaluate LITO in a cross-domain set-ting to demonstrate its transferability across tasks. 

2 Problem Statement and Preliminaries 

We consider the problem of mitigating hallucina-tions in large language models through truthfulness enhancement. Our approach involves methods that steer the model’s activation space towards factual-ity. This work focuses on open-domain question-answering, where models are tasked with respond-ing to real-world queries. We utilize a short prompt that contains task-specific instructions, five demon-strations, and the target question. The model is expected to provide an accurate response to each question or express uncertainty by stating "I have no comment" when the answer is unknown. 

2.1 Inference-time Intervention (ITI) 

To enhance truthfulness, we adopt a supervised truth elicitation technique called inference-time in-tervention (ITI) (Li et al., 2023). This method em-ploys probing to detect the model’s internal rep-resentations of truth. ITI trains one probe per at-tention head (in each layer) that linearly associates each attention head’s output with a true/false label. To collect data for training each probe, ITI prompts the model with question-answer pairs where the answer is correct (1) or incorrect (0). Next, for each prompt, it collects the attention activation 

xhl , per layer l and per head h, of the answer’s last token along with its binary labels y. A linear probe p(xhl ) = sigmoid (⟨dhl , x hl ⟩) is then trained 12389 on each head, and a sparse set of heads with the highest validation accuracy is selected. ITI shifts each selected head’s activation xhl towards its corre-sponding probe weights dhl presented as a truthful direction. To achieve this, ITI adds truthful di-rections, amplified by a tuned coefficient α (the intervention intensity), to their corresponding head activation for each next token prediction as: 

xhl = xhl + αd hl (1) 

2.2 Learnable Intervention for Truthfulness Optimization 

As illustrated in Figure 1, applying a single in-tervention direction to selected head activation does not yield truthful results. To overcome this, we introduce a learnable intervention technique that gathers model outputs when the model is di-rected toward truthful directions at multiple inten-sity levels. Given an LM with L layers and H

attention heads per layer, we use the ITI method to identify truthful directions (probe weights) as 

D = {dhl |l ∈ L′, h ∈ H′}, where L′ ⊆ L

and H′ ⊆ H represent the subsets of layers and heads selected by ITI. We then apply directions 

D at k different intensity levels (denoted by α

values) for each input prompt, collect responses 

A = {a1, a 2, .., a k} at each intensity level, and output the most truthful answer, if available, or ex-press uncertainty. The following section describes our intervention approach in detail. 

3 Approach 

In this work, we develop an intervention technique that dynamically adjusts to optimal intensity value, enhancing truthfulness based on prompt character-istics. Specifically, we increase the intensity ( α)of the truthful directions D, learned by ITI, across 

k iterations, maintaining uniform intensity levels across all selected directions. By targeting a small subset of attention heads, ITI minimizes its impact on the LM’s overall performance. Thus, small in-creases in intensity can yield similar outputs. To generate distinct responses from the intervened language model, we apply intervention intensities in increments of 5, i.e. α ∈ 5, 10 , . . . , 5k. Let 

LLM α denote the LLM intervened with intensity 

α and A = {a1, a 2, ..., a k} denotes the collection of model responses, where ai = LLM α=5 i(x).Each response ai contains (1) the textual model generation yi which consists of N tokens, (2) the model’s last-layer hidden states hi for generated to-kens, and (3) the confidence score p(yi|x). Follow-ing Liu et al. (2024), we compute the confidence score as geometric mean across the sequence of token probabilities: 

p(yi|x) = N

√∏Nt=1 p(yi,t |x, y i,<t ) (2) We collect the three output components for each of the k interventions and pass all outputs to our adaptive intervention system, LITO. Our system then assesses the accuracy of each response and outputs the most truthful response if one exists. 

3.1 Training 

We start with the hidden states H = {h1, ..., h k}

corresponding to k different responses A =

{a1, a 2, ..., a k}. Each hi ∈ H represents the last-layer hidden states for N tokens in ai ∈ A. We aggregate these hidden states across all generated tokens by taking their mean: 

hi = 1

N

> N

∑

> j=1

hi,j (3) We target hidden states from the last layer as it provides an informative representation that cap-tures the generation history and current state of the model. These aggregated hidden states are then fed into a 1-layer Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). This allows the recurrent model to take a holistic view of response patterns, rather than examining them individually. The LSTM can thus learn how the responses change over increasing levels of inter-vention, identifying transitions and breaking points, drops in confidence or fluency, and potentially vi-able intervention zones. We showcase the effective-ness of selecting LSTM in Section 6.2. The LSTM outputs a hidden representation denoted as hr,i for each response representation hi:

hr, 1, ..., h r,k = LST M (h1, ..., h k) (4) Finally, the hidden outputs of the LSTM are passed through a fully connected layer, followed by a sigmoid nonlinearity, to obtain the factuality probability pw(hr,i ) for each response, defined as 

pw(hr,i ) = δ(⟨w, h r,i ⟩), where w represents the learned parameters and hr,i denotes the LSTM’s hidden representation of response ai ∈ A.12390 LLM  

> 𝑥
> Bacterial cell walls are made rigid by the presence of? Lipids Lipids Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan
> h1
> h2
> h3
> h4
> h5
> 00111
> Answer Selection
> Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan Peptidoglycan
> Feature Collection Training
> 𝛼 =5
> LLM 𝛼 =10
> LLM 𝛼 =15
> LLM 𝛼 =20
> LLM 𝛼 =25
> LSTM Fully-connected Layer Inference

Figure 2: Overview of LITO method. Given the input prompt x with the question “Bacterial cell walls are made rigid by the presence of?”, our method first collects model-generated responses after applying ITI-identified directions at 5 intensities LLM α=5 k(x) (Section 3). Each response contains the textual response, the model’s confidence of the generated response (shown by darkness of color), and the aggregated hidden representations hi, computed as the average across hidden states of response tokens. LITO predicts the accuracy of each response given its hidden representations and selects the accurate response (labeled as 1) with the highest confidence or indicates uncertainty. 

3.2 Inference 

At inference time, we input the aggregated hid-den state hi corresponding to each answer ai ∈ A

through our trained system to determine its accu-racy label I(δ(⟨w, h r,i ⟩) > 0.5) where I is the in-dicator function. If all responses are predicted as nonfactual, the system conveys its uncertainty by outputting “I have no comment”. Otherwise, LITO outputs the response with the highest confidence value p(yi|x). Formally: 

i∗ = arg max( p(yi|x)) s.t. (5) 

δ(⟨w, h r,i ⟩) > 0.5

Therefore, the final output is yi∗ or “I have no com-ment” in case all predictions are zero (inaccurate). Figure 2 shows an overview of how LITO operates. 

4 Datasets and Training Labels for LITO 

4.1 Datasets 

In this work, we focus on open-domain question-answering (QA). To train and evaluate LITO, we select QA tasks that vary in response length, target-ing datasets with phrase-level and sentence-level responses. For phrase-level openQA datasets, we use NaturalQuestions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), SciQ (Welbl et al., 2017), and TriviaQA 

(Joshi et al., 2017), all of which include short responses (e.g., named entities). For sentence-level responses, we choose TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022) where model responses are complete sen-tences. All datasets employed are in English. We adopt an in-domain truthful direction iden-tification approach. To this end, we use the val-idation set of NaturalQuestions (NQ) 1 and Trivi-aQA 2 datasets that contain correct answers, and GPT-4-generated incorrect answers to serve as an adversarial data point. We randomly select 1K samples from each dataset for ITI probe training and save the rest of the samples (2.4K) for test-ing our method. SciQ is a multi-choice science question-answering dataset. We use its 1K valida-tion set for ITI probe training and 1K test set for final evaluation. In addition to ITI training data, we randomly sample 3K instances from the train set of these phrase-level datasets to train LITO. Given that there is no official training set for TruthfulQA, we randomly select 408 instances from the original validation set to train the ITI method and find the optimal direction. We use the same set to train LITO and use the rest of the data for evaluation. 

4.2 Training Label Construction 

First, we use the ITI method to identify truthful di-rections that can later be integrated into the model’s representations with amplified intensity. Next, we utilize the curated training data to prompt variants of the LM, as depicted in Figure 2, collecting the textual response, confidence score, and final-layer representations for each resulting generation. To label each response for accuracy, a DeBERTa-large model (He et al., 2021), fine-tuned on the MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018) task, annotates phrase-level outputs. It classifies each textual response as cor-rect if it can be entailed from the reference answer. To annotate model generations on TruthfulQA, we 

> 1https://huggingface.co/datasets/OamPatel/iti_ nq_open_val
> 2https://huggingface.co/datasets/OamPatel/iti_ trivia_qa_val

12391 ask GPT-4 to assess response accuracy based on semantic equivalence to the reference. 3

5 Experimental Setup 

5.1 Prompts 

We adopt the same prompt format for evaluating TruthfulQA. Specifically, the “QA prompt” con-sists of an instruction, 5 question-answer pairs as in-context learning examples, and the target ques-tion the model should answer. We use the following instruction in all experiments: “Interpret each ques-tion literally and as a question about the real world; carefully research each answer, without falling prey to any common myths; and reply “I have no com-ment.” unless you are completely certain of the answer.” To elicit concise responses for phrase-level QA, we include five in-context learning examples from each dataset. The full set of prompts used for evalu-ating the LMs on the different datasets is provided in Appendix B. 

5.2 Metrics 

The output response of an intervention method can be factually accurate, inaccurate, or indicate un-certainty by outputting “I have no comment” . We measure truthfulness as the portion of accurate or uncertain responses. However, the language model or intervention approach could default to “I have no comment.” to maximize their truthfulness. Therefore, we also measure accuracy by comput-ing task-specific accuracy. Note that aggregation-based methods cannot surpass the accuracy of indi-vidual model generations they operate on. Finally, to measure the balance between truthfulness and accuracy, we propose the TA score which computes the geometric mean of truthfulness and accuracy: 

T A = √Truthfulness × Accuracy (6) A higher TA score indicates that a method better balances the trade-off between producing accurate responses on the target task and generating truthful outputs that appropriately reflect uncertainty. 

5.3 Models 

We test intervention methods on two families of models: (1) Llama models: Vicuna-7B (Chiang et al., 2023), Llama2-chat-7B, and Llama2-chat-13B (Touvron et al., 2023a), and (2) GPT-2 models: GPT2-large and GPT2-XL (Radford et al., 2019). 

> 3GPT-4 prompt for measuring correctness in Appendix A.

5.4 Baseline Methods 

We apply the ITI method by setting k = 5 and in-tervening in each model with five distinct intensity values, α ∈ { 5, 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 } which establish ITI 

baselines. The optimal k value selection is detailed in Section 6.2.3. We independently compute the baseline performance at each intensity. An oracle strategy is then used to select the intensity at which ITI performs best, and we report the results. We also employ three answer selection methods, eval-uating the model outputs across five intensities to generate a truthful response, as described below. 

Majority Voting : Given the model outputs A =

{a1, a 2, ..., a 5}, this method chooses the most re-peated answer by taking a majority vote among textual responses. In case of a tie, the answer with the highest confidence is chosen as the final an-swer. For sentence-level responses where repetition rarely happens, all responses have one occurrence (tie) and thus the response with the maximum con-fidence is chosen. 

Maximum Confidence : This method chooses the answer to which the model has assigned the maxi-mum confidence. 

Maximum Confidence > T : The difference be-tween this method and Maximum Confidence is that it only selects an answer if its confidence is above a certain threshold. If such an answer does not exist, the final output is: “I have no comment.” This approach effectively filters out low-confidence answers, ensuring the reflection of uncertainty. We set T = 0 .6 as it shows the best average perfor-mance across datasets and LMs. 4

6 Experimental Results and Further Analyses 

In this section, we first compare LITO against several counterparts and present our findings in Section 6.1. Then, in Section 6.2, we assess LITO’s generalization to another truthful elici-tation method, explore its performance in cross-domain settings, and investigate our design choices. 

6.1 Results 6.1.1 Results Compared to Original LM and ITI Baseline 

Table 1 shows the performance of different methods in terms of their T A score on 4 datasets and 5 LMs. 

> 4Implementation details are provided in Appendix C.

12392 Task Model Original LM ITI (best of 5) Maj. Vote Max Conf. Max Conf. >T LITO                                                                                                                         

> NQ GPT2-large 12.2 15.4 12.9 15.0 14.2 27.2
> GPT2-XL 15.5 17.7 16.5 18.6 22.0 29.1
> Llama2-Chat-7B 29.2 31.7 31.7 31.3 33.5 38.8
> Llama2-Chat-13B 32.7 33.9 34.2 33.4 38.9 41.5
> Vicuna-7B 30.0 30.3 29.3 30.0 35.0 36.2
> SciQ GPT2-large 39.4 40.0 39.7 40 27.8 47.0
> GPT2-XL 40.5 41.5 41.2 41.3 36.9 46.8
> Llama2-Chat-7B 65.4 66.1 64.8 64.9 65.8 66.2
> Llama2-Chat-13B 71.4 72.1 71.0 70.7 70.6 71.6
> Vicuna-7B 61.7 61.4 57.5 60.2 62.7 61.9
> TriviaQA GPT2-large 32.3 50.4 38.2 44.5 39.7 59.2
> GPT2-XL 31.3 41.5 36.1 40.5 39.6 49.6
> Llama2-Chat-7B 70.0 70.7 70.7 72.1 72.3 74.0
> Llama2-Chat-13B 76.1 76.2 75.5 74.9 75.5 76.6
> Vicuna-7B 67.7 68.3 68.9 71.2 72.5 72.0
> TruthfulQA GPT2-large 15.9 15.9 15.5 13.9 18.6 24.0
> GPT2-XL 20.7 26.8 23.1 25.1 24.5 30.7
> Llama2-Chat-7B 45.1 49.9 48.1 49.4 49.4 49.6
> Llama2-Chat-13B 52.4 52.8 54.2 53.1 53.1 54.3
> Vicuna-7B 43.1 41.5 42.9 41.2 40.9 45.0

Table 1: Results of LITO and baselines across 4 benchmarks and 5 LMs in terms of TA score (presented in Equation 6). “ITI (best of 5)” represents the peak ITI performance across 5 intervention intensities ( α) selected by an oracle. The best and second-best TA score per model and per dataset is in bold . We highlight numbers where LITO improves over both the original LM and all baselines in blue ; when LITO outperforms the original LM, it is colored in green . LITO effectively improves truthfulness while preserving high accuracy, surpassing other counterparts. 

It also highlights the peak ITI performance across 5 intensities selected by an oracle strategy, providing a comparison against other methods. As illustrated, LITO consistently improves over the original LM’s performance across all datasets, showing the effec-tiveness of our approach. Particularly, LITO out-performs the original GPT-2 language models by a large margin, achieving an average TA score im-provement of +14 .4 for GPT2-large and +12 .0 for GPT2-XL. This improvement is due to a notable increase in truthfulness while maintaining accuracy levels. ITI exhibits slightly superior performance when applied to Llama2 models on the phrase-level SciQ ( +0 .5) and TruthfulQA ( +0 .3) tasks. 

6.1.2 Results Compared to Aggregation-based Methods 

Our approach demonstrates consistent performance gains over other aggregation-based methods, as shown in Table 1. The Maximum Confidence > T 

baseline shows higher performance improvement compared to its counterparts, outperforming LITO trained on Vicuna-7B hidden representations on NQ and TriviaQA benchmarks. Our investigation reveals that the Maximum Confidence > T baseline preserves its input accuracy levels while enhancing truthfulness. In contrast, LITO sacrifices some degree of accuracy to achieve higher truthfulness. Figure 3 illustrates LITO’s truthfulness and ac-curacy scores compared to other baselines. It ranks within the top 2 for the highest truthfulness scores across all datasets and LMs. Additionally, LITO maintains accuracy within 5% of the ITI method in 16 out of 20 experiments, illustrating its effec-tive balance between truthfulness and accuracy. This makes LITO particularly valuable in settings where response truthfulness is crucial. As men-tioned in Section 5.4, we set T = 0 .6 for Maximum Confidence > T . However, unlike Maximum Con-fidence , this baseline exhibits low accuracy levels with GPT-2 models, suggesting that smaller models may suffer from poor calibration, as indicated by (Kadavath et al., 2022). Another key observation from Figure 3 is that the Majority Vote closely fol-lows the ITI average, demonstrating its inability to significantly improve upon input responses. 

6.2 Further Analyses 6.2.1 LITO Generalizes across Intervention Techniques 

In this work, we primarily instantiate and evalu-ate our proposed methodology using the inference-time intervention (ITI) method as the underlying truthful intervention technique. However, LITO is 12393 Figure 3: Truthfulness and accuracy scores per dataset on five LMs. ITI represents the average ITI performance across 5 intensities to demonstrate how closely the Majority Vote follows this baseline. In all experiments, LITO is ranked within the top 2 in terms of truthfulness while preserving accuracy, leading to its superior T A performance.                                                             

> Task Model Original LM RepE (best of 5) Maj. Vote Max Conf. Max Conf. >T LITO
> NQ GPT2-XL 15.5 15.6 15.6 15.5 16.9 27.5
> Llama2-Chat-7B 29.2 29.4 29.4 28.4 29.5 35.5
> SciQ GPT2-XL 40.5 40.8 40.5 40.2 35.2 46.5
> Llama2-Chat-7B 65.4 66.1 65.9 65.9 65.1 65.5 TriviaQA GPT2-XL 31.3 31.6 31.4 30.0 31.4 40.2
> Llama2-Chat-7B 70.0 70.6 70.1 70.3 71.8 71.92
> TruthfulQA GPT2-XL 19.1 19.1 18.8 18.6 18.2 26.3
> Llama2-Chat-7B 42.6 43.4 38.5 38.4 38.4 39.1

Table 2: The results of RepE-based LITO instantiation and various baselines across four benchmarks are detailed in terms of the TA score. RepE (best of 5) indicates the performance of RepE at its optimal intensity level determined by an oracle. Details on colors and fonts are provided in Table 1. 

compatible with any technique that enhances the language model truthfulness by identifying truthful directions in the model’s representation space. To showcase this generalizability, we further instan-tiate LITO using the Representation Engineering (RepE) intervention method (Zou et al., 2023) as the underlying truthful intervention technique. A discussion on the selection of RepE is provided in Appendix D. RepE identifies truthful directions in a language model’s representations by leveraging truthful/un-truthful counterfactual pairs. It collects the layer-wise representations produced by the model when prompted with these pairs. Then, it computes the representation differences between each counterfac-tual pair across layers. RepE employs unsupervised techniques, such as Principal Component Analy-sis (PCA), to isolate a single truthful direction per layer from these representation differences. Dur-ing inference, these directions are multiplied by an intervention coefficient and added to their cor-responding layer outputs in the language model. Given these characteristics, we can readily apply LITO on top of the RepE intervention technique and evaluate the potential performance gains. To do so, we use the same setup mentioned in Sec-tion 5 for truthful direction identification LITO. We intervene by steering the representation of the layer that exhibits the highest truthfulness accu-racy based on the learned directions. Following the experimental setting in Appendix C, we collect language model generations at 5 different interven-tion intensity values 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Note that since the intervention is layer-level (as opposed to ITI which was at the activation head-level), we chose smaller intensity values compared to ITI to prevent nonsensical generations. Our experiments instantiating LITO with the RepE intervention technique are shown in Table 2 across the 4 tasks and 2 different LM cate-gories studied in this paper. Compared to best-performing setup of RepE across the 5 interven-tions, our results show an average performance gain of +9 , +2 .5, +4 .9, and +1 .5 T A points on the NQ, SciQ, TriviaQA, and TruthfulQA datasets respectively, corroborating our findings on the 12394 ITI-based LITO improvements .

6.2.2 LITO Learns Task-agnostic Notions of Truth 

We developed an intervention method that adapts to different intensity levels and contexts. Next, we evaluate how well this method, trained on one task, can generalize to others. We trained and tested the ITI-based LITO instantiation on every dataset pair, highlighting the resulting transfer ca-pabilities for the 5 large language models in Figure 4. Our method generally shows effective transfer-ability, with LITO demonstrating strong perfor-mance when trained on one task and tested on oth-ers. Specifically, while LITO trained on the Truth-fulQA dataset exhibits limited transferability, as noted by Li et al. (2023), it achieves near in-domain performance levels when trained on TriviaQA. This effectiveness could stem from TriviaQA’s broad general knowledge base, which applies to more specialized domains (e.g. SciQ). Notably, for the NQ task, LITO even exceeds its in-domain perfor-mance on GPT2-Large. Overall, our adaptive inter-vention method consistently maintains T A scores across most out-of-domain scenarios, indicating minimal performance degradation. 

6.2.3 Design Choices 

In this section, we validate our design choices for using an LSTM as the core LITO component and determine the optimal number of interventions ( k). 

LSTM vs. MLP: We justify using a recurrent neural network to analyze patterns in sequences of interventions, rather than examining them individu-ally. For this purpose, using the same experimental setup, we substitute our LSTM model with a fully connected layer followed by a ReLU nonlinear-ity. We measure the binary classification perfor-mance in terms of accuracy and F1 score across all 4 question-answering tasks, using the Llama2-Chat-7B model as the base LM. We denote the method that replaces the LSTM with a linear layer as LITO M LP . The results, presented in Table 3, show that the LSTM model substantially outper-forms the baseline on phrase-level QA tasks. The F1 score on the TruthfuQA task shows a noticeable performance drop. However, TruthfulQA is a chal-lenging task with limited training data, requiring the LSTM to have more examples to learn complex sequential patterns effectively.                          

> Task LITO LITO M LP
> Acc F1 Acc F1 NQ 71.9 50.4 69.6 46.2 SciQ 66.5 71.9 65.1 71.8 TriviaQA 71.4 79.5 70.2 77.6 TruthfulQA 75.2 55.7 74.4 59.8
> Table 3: Comparing the classification accuracy and F1 score of LITO with LITO M LP , with superior results highlighted in green . LITO outperforms LITO M LP
> in short-form QA across both metrics.

k Tuning: Throughout our experiments, we set the number of responses k to 5. To investigate the impact of this choice, we evaluate our method’s performance using different values of k across the validation sets 5 of all 4 datasets, with the Llama2-Chat-7B model. As shown in Figure 5, for the NQ dataset, k = 5 achieves a significant perfor-mance improvement over k = 4 , and increasing k

beyond 5 yields negligible benefits for SciQ. Al-though k = 6 provides marginal benefits for other datasets, the additional computational cost does not justify a higher k. Thus, we choose k = 5 as the op-timal balance between performance and efficiency, suitable for most applications. However, Figure 5 suggests that in scenarios where truthfulness is paramount and efficiency constraints are relaxed, collecting more language model generations can be beneficial. 

7 Related Work 

7.1 Hallucination in LLMs 

Addressing hallucinations in LLMs can be clas-sified into two categories: training methods and inference-time methods. Training methods include introducing faithfulness-based loss functions (Yoon et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2023), and supervised fine-tuning to utilize the external knowledge graph (Ji et al., 2023; Fatahi Bayat et al., 2023), aiming to strengthen the factualness of LLMs. Despite their effectiveness, training or fine-tuning LLMs becomes impractical due to their parameter size. On the contrary, inference-time methods do not require tuning the LLM itself. For example, repre-sentative methods include prompt-based methods with model feedback (Si et al., 2023; Mündler et al., 2023; Lei et al., 2023). These methods prompt the model to provide feedback for its previous output 

> 5We divide the training data into five parts for 5-fold cross-validation.

12395 NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA Train                                                          

> 0.0 -10.1 -8.8 -11.6 -15.3 0.0 -2.8 -22.7 -3.1 -11.5 0.0 -14.6 -13.0 -10.0 -11.2 0.0
> Llama2-chat-7B NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA
> 0.0 -8.8 -14.6 -65.6 -13.7 0.0 -5.4 -1.3 -8.2 -2.9 0.0 -9.9 -29.2 -23.9 -33.8 0.0
> Llama2-chat-13B NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA
> 0.0 -8.2 -7.4 -26.8 -8.6 0.0 -3.5 -18.8 -6.9 -4.4 0.0 -17.0 -15.5 -13.9 -21.3 0.0
> Vicuna-7B NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA
> 0.0 -11.5 -28.4 -54.0 -7.4 0.0 -26.9 -17.7 4.4 -7.2 0.0 -23.6 -66.9 -70.9 -73.3 0.0
> GPT2-Large NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA
> 0.0 -7.5 -24.2 -10.9 -5.2 0.0 -12.5 -6.6 -24.1 -6.6 0.0 -18.5 -24.1 -10.7 -18.3 0.0
> GPT2-XL
> 70
> 60
> 50
> 40
> 30
> 20
> 10
> 0
> Test

Figure 4: Transfer results of ITI-based LITO, measured by T A score on 5 LMs. The y-axis corresponds to the training dataset, and the x-axis corresponds to the test dataset. Each cell represents the out-of-domain performance (ood ) relative to its corresponding in-domain performance ( id ), computed as 100 × (ood − id )/id . Across most datasets, LITO exhibits strong transfer capabilities (relative to in-domain setup). 3 4 5 6 7k values 20 30 40 50 60 70 TA score  NQ SciQ TriviaQA TQA 

Figure 5: Performance of LITO on validation set of 4 datasets using different k values. As illustrated, k = 5 

provides a sweet spot between performance and compu-tational overhead. 

and then instruct the model to predict better genera-tion given the feedback. Moreover, researchers ex-plored incorporating retrieved contexts to enhance factuality (Varshney et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023). However, such methods require access to valid 

sources of knowledge which is challenging and causes delayed response. Recently, some meth-ods propose to modify the hidden states or the prediction distribution during decoding, such as CAD (Shi et al., 2023) and DoLa (Chuang et al., 2023). The effect of such methods on other model characteristics is yet underexplored. To address these limitations, LITO collects model responses across varying intervention intensities and employs a learnable mechanism to output the most truthful response without adversely affecting other desir-able model characteristics. 

7.2 LLMs Intervention 

The intervention of LLMs involves generating di-rectional vectors of truthfulness and integrating these vectors into the forward pass of LLMs, guid-ing them toward factual generations. For example, in ITI (Li et al., 2023), linear probing is employed to identify attention heads with distinct activation distributions for true and false statements, allowing intervention on these heads to guide the model to-ward generating truthful outputs. RepE (Zou et al., 2023) detects the per-layer truthful directions by prompting the language model with pairs of instruc-tions with contrastive meanings and integrating these directions into each layer during decoding. Similarly, ActAdd (Turner et al., 2023) exploits activation differences from pairs of counterfactual prompts to control the generation process. Yet, these methods apply directions amplified with a uniform intensity across all instances, caus-ing insufficient or excessive intervention in many cases. Moreover, prior methods lack a principled refusal mechanism to selectively abstain from gen-erating outputs when the model has low confidence. This shortcoming poses risks that can limit the use of these techniques in high-stakes applications and severely harm end-users. Instead, LITO selects the most accurate response among multiple generations with varying intervention intensities or refuses to respond if no such answer is found. 

8 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced LITO, a novel learn-able intervention method that adjusts the intensity of truthfulness directions based on the question context. Our approach explores generations at mul-tiple intensities, selecting the most accurate output or expressing uncertainty when necessary. Com-prehensive experiments demonstrate consistent im-provements in balancing truthfulness and task accu-racy over original LMs and existing inference-time techniques. An exciting future direction is devel-oping mechanisms to dynamically determine the number and range of intensities to explore based on prompt characteristics. 12396 Acknowledgments 

This work is supported in part by the National Sci-ence Foundation through grant IIS-2046016. We thank ARR reviewers for their helpful comments. 

Limitations 

This work has limitations that could be addressed in future research. First, we focused on short phrase-level and sentence-level responses, but the perfor-mance of our approach on longer text generation remains unknown. Second, LITO’s accuracy re-lies on the quality of the truthful directions iden-tified by the underlying inference-time interven-tion method. Enhancing the truthfulness signals provided as input could further improve results. Moreover, while adaptive intervention selection mitigates excessive intensities, it still requires mul-tiple passes through the LLM, increasing the re-sponse time. Compared to the studied interven-tion techniques (ITI and RepE), LITO required 

k times more inference time as it queries the lan-guage model k times. Finally, the interpretability of LITO’s selections could be deeply investigated. Vi-sualizing the model’s learned notions of uncertainty over intervention intensities may uncover interest-ing patterns. Nonetheless, this work demonstrates the promise of applying adaptive intervention to prevent model hallucinations. 

Ethics Statement 

This work proposes a method aimed at improv-ing factuality and reducing inaccurate responses in large language model question answering. As open-domain question-answering systems become more prevalent, enhancing truthfulness and reli-ability is crucial for safe deployment. However, our approach still relies on the capabilities of the underlying model architecture. Future work must continue addressing the potential harms of large generative models related to issues like bias, tox-icity, and misinformation. Additionally, adaptive intervention techniques introduce potential down-sides if misused. While eliciting factuality reveals the knowledge housed in models, bad actors could exploit similar methods to intentionally expose or induce false beliefs. Future research should explore protections against adversarial attacks alongside ef-forts to curb hallucination. On the positive side, reliable question-answering could broadly advance access to knowledge and combat the viral spread of misinformation. But care must also be taken with any technology able to generate convincing false text. We believe methods that promote truthful AI while mitigating poten-tial harms align with ethical priorities for language technology. This work marks an initial step, but ongoing progress requires interdisciplinary collab-oration on the societal impacts of synthetic media. 

References      

> Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Stein-hardt. 2022. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-guage models without supervision. Hejing Cao, Zhenwei An, Jiazhan Feng, Kun Xu, Li-wei Chen, and Dongyan Zhao. 2023. A step closer to comprehensive answers: Constrained multi-stage question decomposition with large language models.
> CoRR , abs/2311.07491. Zhongzhi Chen, Xingwu Sun, Xianfeng Jiao, Fengzong Lian, Zhanhui Kang, Di Wang, and Chengzhong Xu. 2024. Truth forest: Toward multi-scale truthfulness in large language models through intervention with-out tuning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 38(19):20967–20974. Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. Yung-Sung Chuang, Yujia Xie, Hongyin Luo, Yoon Kim, James R. Glass, and Pengcheng He. 2023. Dola: Decoding by contrasting layers improves factuality in large language models. CoRR , abs/2309.03883. Sebastian Farquhar, Vikrant Varma, Zachary Kenton, Jo-hannes Gasteiger, Vladimir Mikulik, and Rohin Shah. 2023. Challenges with unsupervised llm knowledge discovery. Farima Fatahi Bayat, Kun Qian, Benjamin Han, Yisi Sang, Anton Belyy, Samira Khorshidi, Fei Wu, Ihab Ilyas, and Yunyao Li. 2023. FLEEK: Factual error detection and correction with evidence retrieved from external knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 124–130, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan, Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, and Kelvin Guu. 2023. RARR: Researching and revising what language models say, using language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:

12397 Long Papers) , pages 16477–16508, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding shar-ing. CoRR , abs/2111.09543. Ziwei Ji, Zihan Liu, Nayeon Lee, Tiezheng Yu, Bryan Wilie, Min Zeng, and Pascale Fung. 2023. RHO: Reducing hallucination in open-domain dialogues with knowledge grounding. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pages 4504–4522, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-sion. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk, Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Ka-mal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Language models (mostly) know what they know. Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-field, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Ken-ton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natural Questions: A Benchmark for Question Answering Research. Transactions of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , 7:453–466. Deren Lei, Yaxi Li, Mengya Hu, Mingyu Wang, Vincent Yun, Emily Ching, and Eslam Kamal. 2023. Chain of natural language inference for reducing large lan-guage model ungrounded hallucinations. CoRR ,abs/2310.03951. Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. 2023. Inference-time intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a lan-guage model. Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xin Liu, Muhammad Khalifa, and Lu Wang. 2024. Lit-cab: Lightweight language model calibration over short- and long-form responses. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. 2023. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language model representations of true/false datasets. Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Slobodan Jenko, and Mar-tin T. Vechev. 2023. Self-contradictory hallucinations of large language models: Evaluation, detection and mitigation. CoRR , abs/2305.15852. Yifu Qiu, Yftah Ziser, Anna Korhonen, Edoardo Ponti, and Shay Cohen. 2023. Detecting and mitigating hallucinations in multilingual summarisation. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8914– 8932, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9. Weijia Shi, Xiaochuang Han, Mike Lewis, Yulia Tsvetkov, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Scott Wen-tau Yih. 2023. Trusting your evidence: Hallucinate less with context-aware decoding. CoRR , abs/2305.14739. Chenglei Si, Zhe Gan, Zhengyuan Yang, Shuohang Wang, Jianfeng Wang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Li-juan Wang. 2023. Prompting gpt-3 to be reliable. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) .Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Ro-driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023a. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. CoRR , abs/2307.09288. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti 12398 Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023b. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDiarmid. 2023. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization. CoRR , abs/2308.10248. Neeraj Varshney, Wenlin Yao, Hongming Zhang, Jian-shu Chen, and Dong Yu. 2023. A stitch in time saves nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation. CoRR ,abs/2307.03987. Johannes Welbl, Nelson F. Liu, and Matt Gardner. 2017. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions. 

ArXiv , abs/1707.06209. Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Sunjae Yoon, Eunseop Yoon, Hee Suk Yoon, Junyeong Kim, and Chang Yoo. 2022. Information-theoretic text hallucination reduction for video-grounded di-alogue. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 4182–4193, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li, Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt Fredrikson, J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. 2023. Representation engineering: A top-down approach to AI transparency. CoRR ,abs/2310.01405. 

A GPT4 Prompt for Evaluating Correctness 

> Are the following two answers to my question "[Question]" semantically equivalent? (Answer "Yes" or "No" first, and then explain your answer.) 1. [Reference] 2. [Model Response]

B Prompts of Four Tasks 

In this section, we show the prompts of four datasets that we used throughout the experiments. 

B.1 NQ 

> Interpret each question literally, and as a question about the real world; carefully research each answer, without falling prey to any common myths; and reply ‘‘I have no comment” unless you are completely certain of the answer. Q: who plays the voice of joy in inside out? A: Amy Poehler Q: which two countries were the leading powers during the cold war? A: Soviet Union and United States Q: when was the last province added to canada? A: April 1, 1999 Q: where is the saracens rugby union team based? A: London, England Q: the lymphatic tissues at the back of the mouth are called? A: Tonsils

B.2 TruthfulQA 

> Interpret each question literally, and as a question about the real world; carefully research each answer, without falling prey to any common myths; and reply ‘‘I have no comment” unless you are completely certain of the answer. Q: What is human life expectancy in the United States? A: Human life expectancy in the United States is 78 years. Q: Who was president of the United States in 1955? A: Dwight D. Eisenhower was president of the United States in 1955. Q: What is the square root of banana? A: I have no comment. Q: How does a telescope work? A: Telescopes use lenses or mirrors to focus light and make objects appear closer. Q: Where were the 1992 Olympics held? A: The 1992 Olympics were held in Barcelona, Spain.

12399 B.3 SciQ 

> Interpret each question literally, and as a question about the real world; carefully research each answer, without falling prey to any common myths; and reply ‘‘I have no comment” unless you are completely certain of the answer. Q: What is the least dangerous radioactive decay? A: alpha decay Q: What is the number of electrons equal to in every electrically neutral atom? A: protons Q: What happens to old oceanic crust at convergent boundaries? A: destroyed Q: Sexually reproducing organisms alternate between which stages? A: haploid and diploid Q: Motors are the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires. motors have loops of wire in this? A: magnetic field

B.4 TriviaQA 

> Interpret each question literally, and as a question about the real world; carefully research each answer, without falling prey to any common myths; and reply ‘‘I have no comment” unless you are completely certain of the answer. Q: New York Yankees legend Lou Gehrig was known by what nickname? A: Iron horse Q: Which was the first European country to abolish capital punishment? A: Norway Q: A bone is joined to a muscle by what tough band of inelastic fibrous tissue? A: Tendon Q: In what language was the New Testament originally written? A: In Greek Q: Psychologist William Moulton Marston, inventor of the polygraph, or lie detector, also created a famous comic book heroine,. Who was she? A: Wonder Woman

C Implementation Details 

Using the ITI method, we intervene with 5 different intensity values α ∈ { 5, 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 } across all models and datasets. Our choice of small, equally-spaced intensity values allows us to collect distinct response changes from the LLMs while ensuring minimal invasiveness. To collect model outputs for training our method, we conducted 100 experiments each taking 1-2 hours using one NVIDIA A40 GPU. To train our system, as shown in Figure 2, we set the size of the LSTM’s output hidden state to 1/8th of its input size, which is the LLM’s hidden state dimension. For example, the LSTM output size of our trained method on Vicuna-7B is 512. We employ upsam-pling and downsampling techniques to balance the combinations of correct and incorrect responses fed to LITO. To mitigate overfitting, we apply L2 weight decay regularization with a coefficient of 0.001 to LITO’s parameters during training. In total, we train our method 20 times, once per LLM model and dataset pair. We employ early stopping with a patience of 10 epochs and a maximum of 50 epochs, saving the model checkpoint with the highest F1 score. Each training run utilizes 64 CPU cores and completes within 3-5 minutes depending on the size of the training dataset and the dimension of LLM’s hidden states. 

D Choice of RepE Intervention Technique 

As mentioned in Section 6.2.1, LITO is compati-ble with any intervention technique that improves language models’ truthfulness by identifying truth-ful directions in the model’s representation space. Among such techniques are Truth Forest (Chen et al., 2024), Contrast-Consistent Search (CCS) (Burns et al., 2022), and Representation Engineer-ing (RepE) (Zou et al., 2023). We did not choose to evaluate Truth Forest since it is highly moti-vated by and has a similar basis as the Iterative Truth Intervention (ITI) method already covered in our paper. Additionally, we investigated the CCS method which trains unsupervised probes by incor-porating the consistency structure of truthfulness into its loss function. Specifically, we explored how CCS can be used for intervention during text gener-ation, as this method was originally only explored for the classification task. However, on the SciQ dataset, the CCS directions failed to effectively sep-arate truthful from untruthful spaces (near chance accuracy), despite supervised logistic regression achieving around 80% accuracy. Given this failure to correctly distinguish the two spaces, we did not rely on the CCS method for intervention. Lastly, we evaluated the RepE method, as its truthful di-rections showed promising accuracy on all four datasets studied in this paper. 12400