Title: 2025.acl-long.1221.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1221.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 14 Jul 2025 11:33:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 25109–25131 July 27 - August 1, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Document-Level Event-Argument Data Augmentation for Challenging Role Types 

## Joseph Gatto, Omar Sharif, Parker Seegmiller, Sarah M. Preum 

## Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College 

## {joseph.m.gatto.gr}@dartmouth.edu 

## Abstract 

Event Argument Extraction (EAE) is a daunt-ing information extraction problem — with sig-nificant limitations in few-shot cross-domain (FSCD) settings. A common solution to FSCD modeling is data augmentation. Unfortunately, existing augmentation methods are not well-suited to a variety of real-world EAE contexts, including (i) modeling long documents (docu-ments with over 10 sentences), and (ii) mod-eling challenging role types (i.e., event roles with little to no training data and semantically outlying roles). We introduce two novel LLM-powered data augmentation methods for gen-erating extractive document-level EAE sam-ples using zero in-domain training data . We validate the generalizability of our approach on four datasets — showing significant perfor-mance increases in low-resource settings. Our highest performing models provide a 13-pt in-crease in F1 score on zero-shot role extraction in FSCD evaluation. 

## 1 Introduction 

In recent years, there has been considerable progress in the domain of Event Argument Ex-traction (EAE), as advances in question answering (Du and Cardie, 2020), prompt tuning (Ma et al., 2022), and semantic graph modeling (Yang et al., 2023b) have led to state-of-the-art results on EAE benchmarks. However, some simplifying assump-tions made in prior work limit their applicability in a more complex real-world setting, including using only sentence-level EAE annotations (Dod-dington et al., 2004; Song et al., 2015; Parekh et al., 2023), reliance on large-scale annotation (Ebner et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022), or that training and testing data come from the same domain (Ebner et al., 2020; Doddington et al., 2004; Sun et al., 2022; Sharif et al., 2024). In many real-world applications, EAE systems need to be prepared to extract information from 

Figure 1: In (a) we leverage LLM’s prior knowledge of Mad Libs to generate document-level extractive EAE data. In (b) we generate synthetic event structures and use them to produce event-centric documents. We em-ploy semantic n-gram matching to align the structure with spans in the generated document for EAE data cre-ation. Our approach generates DocEAE samples using 

zero in-domain training data , making it generalizable to new domains. 

long documents (10+ sentences) given limited train-ing data in a new domain. For example Tong et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2023a) demonstrate the chal-lenge of EAE on long documents in novel domains with limited training data. In recent years, curation of event-centric datasets focusing on niche domains has become increasingly popular. For example, event extraction is now studied in the context of social media discourse (Sharif et al., 2024), clinical case reports (Ma et al., 2023a), pharmacovigilance (Sun et al., 2022), and cyber security (Satyapanich et al., 2020), among others. When considering the high-cost of large-scale document-level span annotation from domain-experts, event extraction in a low-resource, cross-domain setting becomes increasingly important. One solution to this problem is to strategically generate training samples for event modeling in a given domain. However, many related works in EAE data augmentation such as (Gao et al., 2022; 

25109 Ma et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023) only focus on 

sentence-level tasks. The few prior works in Do-cEAE augmentation do not generate new data sam-ples, but rather augment existing data (Liu et al., 2022) or use a pre-trained model to weakly label unannotated corpora (Liu et al., 2021). To the best of our knowledge, no prior work provides a solu-tion that can help resolve the following challenges in DocEAE data generation: (i) generating novel, event-specific long documents for argument span extraction, where arguments for a given event can occur anywhere throughout the document , (ii) generating data for challenging role types , includ-ing those with little to no training data, and those which are semantically outlying compared to other roles. As a motivating example of this challenging gen-eration task, consider the cross-domain EAE task introduced in DocEE (Tong et al., 2022) where the task is to transfer knowledge from a collec-tion of source domain events (e.g., Road Crash ,

Celebrity Death , Bank Robbery ) to a set of events in a new domain, Natural Disasters (e.g., Droughts ,

Earthquakes , Tsunamis ). Each event in the target domain training set only has 5 documents available for training. Across all samples representing the 

Volcano Eruption event, for example, zero doc-uments contain annotation for the role The State of the Volcano (Dormant or Active) . This makes this role challenging for many DocEAE models to extract. Similar challenges may arise as one tries to develop a document-level EAE model for a new domain or a new dataset, with limited labeled data, incomplete event schema, and/or challenging roles. We address this issue by introducing two strate-gies for LLM-powered DocEAE data augmentation as shown in Figure 1: (i) Mad Lib Generation (MLG) is inspired by the insight that new DocEAE samples can be formulated as a Mad Lib, a popular game involving categorically templated documents. In MLG, we consider the “blanks" found in Mad Libs as roles in an event schema. This allows us to leverage LLMs’ strong conceptual priors of Mad Libs for templated text generation. We use LLMs to both generate and solve Mad Libs in this frame-work. (ii) Struct2Text (S2T): an LLM-powered event-document generation pipeline, which can transform synthetic structured information (e.g., a dictionary of role-argument mappings) into event-centric documents. Note that both MLG and S2T are designed to generate DocEAE data using only an event schema (i.e., the event name and a list of valid roles per event). This makes MLG and S2T generalizable to datasets with and without in-depth ontologies. Our contributions in this study are as follows: 1. We develop two new LLM-powered methods for cross-domain DocEAE data generation, MLG and S2T. 1 We explore our methods in the context of a diverse set of both propriety and open-source LLMs. Our top-performing methods provide a statistically significant in-crease in the F1-score on challenging DocEE sub-tasks such as 0-shot role extraction. We also demonstrate strong performance on task-specific metrics for performance assessment on challenging role types. 2. We demonstrate the generalizability of our proposed method via evaluation on additional EAE datasets namely RAMS (Ebner et al., 2020), DiscourseEE (Sharif et al., 2024), and PHEE (Sun et al., 2022). Experimental re-sults show a 13.6-point average increase in F1-score on low-resource EAE tasks without relying on in-domain data for generation. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Document-Level Event Argument Extraction 

Early work studying Event Argument Extrac-tion (EAE) focuses on sentence-level data, us-ing the popular ACE05 (Doddington et al., 2004) dataset. More recently, some work has focused on document-level datasets such as RAMS (Ebner et al., 2020), WikiEvents (Li et al., 2021), Dis-courseEE (Sharif et al., 2024), and DocEE (Tong et al., 2022). In this study, we primarily focus on DocEE as it is unique in providing a large dataset (20k+ samples), long documents (10+ sentences) and a pre-defined cross-domain evaluation task. For this reason, other recent works have also fo-cused their attention on DocEE (Yang et al., 2023a). We provide secondary analysis on other relevant EAE tasks in Section 5 to demonstrate the general-izability of our methods. 

2.2 Data Augmentation for EAE 

To the best of our knowledge, there is no other work that aims to generate novel documents for DocEAE. However, there are adjacent works in the  

> 1Paper resources can be found here https://tinyurl. com/Doc-EAE-Data-Aug

25110 Figure 2: Visualizing our data generation pipeline for both MLG and S2T. In-context demonstrations are sampled from a source domain. Source domain demonstrations are used alongside semantics derived from the the target event schema for generation of new DocEAE samples. 

realm of EAE data augmentation. Liu et al. (2021) use pre-trained EAE models to silver-label (i.e., use a pre-trained model to annotate) unannotated documents as additional data augmentation. Liu et al. (2022) use pre-trained language models to augment existing samples by masking annotated argument spans and then generating alternate ones. Gao et al. (2022) do the opposite by first mask-ing unannotated spans, then using a pre-trained T5 model to replace such spans as data augmenta-tion. Wang et al. (2023) perform a reinforcement-learning based solution to sentence-level EE data generation. Contrary to our work, none of the afore-mentioned methods generate fully novel documents and often rely on augmenting existing samples. Works that augment existing samples have limited control of role-type distribution and are not suited to model 0-shot roles, which is a focal point of our work. One recent work that leverages LLMs for sentence-level EAE data augmentation is Ma et al. (2023b) where they employ LLMs in a multi-step prompt and self-reflect structure-to-text generation pipeline. This method relies heavily on event on-tology information not available for many datasets such as event definitions, role definitions, and valid entity types per role. Crucially, the list of datasets which do not have in-depth ontologies includes Do-cEE (Tong et al., 2022) as well as other datasets evaluated in this work, such as Sharif et al. (2024). Future works may explore how to adapt this method for a more diverse set of DocEAE tasks. 

## 3 Methods 

In Figure 2 we showcase our data generation pipeline for both Mad Lib Generation (MLG) and Struct2Text (S2T). We describe each method in detail in the following section. 

3.1 Mad Lib Generation (MLG) 

The goal of Mad Lib Generation is to create a tem-plated text document with masked placeholders which each have a semantic category (See Figure 1). Mad Libs are related to information extraction tasks such as EAE as they assign categories to textual spans. In this work, we leverage LLMs to generate event-specific Mad Libs, where the masked docu-ment placeholder categories are sourced from an event schema. LLM-Generated solutions to Mad Libs create novel DocEAE samples, as masked placeholders represent argument spans in the gen-erated document. 

MLG Generator: To generate an event-driven Mad Lib, we first construct k in-context demonstra-tions from the source domain which map an event name and a corresponding event schema (i.e. a list of valid roles for the given event) to a Mad Lib-formatted document. Source domain documents are converted to Mad Libs by using role annotations to replace argument spans with masked placehold-ers (e.g. The event happened in New York → The event happened in [LOCATION]). We use the in-context demonstrations to guide the LLM on how to map event information from the target domain into a templated document. Here, 25111 in-context learning serves only to guide the LLM on output structure, while parametric knowledge is utilized to map target event semantics to novel documents. Note that for each generation, we aim to output a document that contains every possible role for a given event. Our strategy does not gen-erate documents that selectively include/exclude certain event role subsets. We choose this strategy for the following reason. A core challenge of Do-cEAE data generation is the issue of under-labeled documents . That is, if the desired length of a docu-ment about a single event is large while the number of roles to be included is small, it is very difficult to prevent the LLM from accidentally generating an unintended role. We mitigate this issue by pro-viding the LLM with all possible target roles as Mad Lib categories and then validate its efficacy extrinsically. 

MLG Solver: Once we have generated a target do-main Mad Lib, we use k in-context demonstrations to prompt the LLM to replace the templated com-ponents of the Mad Lib with contextually valid ar-gument spans. Specifically, source-domain data is used to guide the LLM on generation of {role : ar-gument} pairs that can be slotted into the templated document using string replacement (shown in Fig-ure 1). The result is an event-centric document with annotation for argument extraction. Since each doc-ument aims to represent all roles in an event, MLG facilitates the generation of challenging role types. 

Data Quality Controls: Given that we are gener-ating long documents using a variety of LLMs of varying quality, generation errors may occur. Thus, upon detection of imperfections such as a large number of missing arguments or hallucinated roles, we perform a post-processing step to ensure data accuracy, which is discussed in detail in Appendix B. For both the Mad Lib Generation and Solving tasks, we use k=3 samples from the source domain with moderate length and high role density to min-imize API costs for use with proprietary LLMs. Generated data statistics are shown in Appendix A Table 3. Additionally, we provide our prompts and sample data in Appendix B and I, respectively. 

3.2 Struct2Text (S2T) 

We ground both our Structure Generator and Struct2Text Generator to an existing data gen-eration framework from LangChain (LangChain, 2024). We describe the functionality of the frame-work and our modifications below. 

Structure Generator: As shown in Figure 2, the goal of this module is to generate an event record (i.e. a dictionary of role → argument mappings). To perform generation, we first construct an empty event record using Pydantic (Colvin et al., 2024), which allows us to encode event information as Python classes. Pydantic is utilized in (LangChain, 2024) due to its strong integration with OpenAI models. During structure generation, an LLM is prompted to populate an empty event record for a given event, generating arguments for each role. Note that to encourage generalizability to EAE datasets with varying degrees of event ontology information, target domain event semantics are de-rived solely using event and role names in this set-ting. 

Struct2Text Generator: The structure generator output is then fed to an LLM which is prompted to transform the event structure into a document containing the corresponding event information. We modify the prompt structure from (LangChain, 2024) to better control the generation by providing style guides and generation length requirements to match the target distribution. 

Struct2Text Aligner: A key limitation of (LangChain, 2024) is its inability to reliably gen-erate documents containing exact substrings re-quired for extractive tasks such as EAE. In other words, while information from the structure may be present in the generated document, the LLM may have rephrased the event arguments in a way that makes identifying argument location difficult. Thus, to adapt this method for DocEAE data aug-mentation, we implement a Struct2Text Aligner to map event arguments output by the structure generator to spans in the S2T-generated document. Specifically, we perform semantic n-gram match-ing between the structure and document. Our matching algorithm compares the argument in the event structure with every possible n-gram (up to n=20) in the document and returns the n-gram with the highest cosine similarity using SBERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019a). Any arguments that have cosine similarity lower than an inclusion threshold α are considered to have not been gener-ated and are discarded from the event record. Simi-lar to MLG, S2T aims to generate role-dense train-ing examples via generation of DocEAE data con-taining annotation for all roles in an event schema. This paradigm allows us to generate zero-shot roles without reliance on existing samples. We provide S2T sample data in Appendix I, generated data 25112 statistics in Table 3, as well as additional S2T methodological details in Appendix C. 

## 4 Experiments 

This section presents the (i) datasets, (ii) baseline augmentation strategies, (iii) EAE models, and (iv) evaluation metrics used in our study. 

4.1 Evaluation Datasets Primary Evaluation: Our primary evaluation in this study examines MLG and S2T capacity for augmentation of challenging role types. We use the cross-domain split of the DocEE dataset for this evaluation. See Appendix A Table 6 for Do-cEE dataset statistics. The task is structured to allow pre-training on a large number of source do-main events, followed by fine-tuning on a target domain for which there are only very few anno-tated documents. In this dataset, the target domain is comprised of 10 event types, which are all under the common theme of “Natural Disasters". This grouping of source and target event domains was chosen to reduce overlap between source and tar-get role types (Tong et al., 2022). During few-shot cross-domain training, only 5 documents for each type of event are provided. 

Secondary Evaluation: We additionally explore the capacity of our methods to improve perfor-mance in a classic augmentation setting on datasets with fewer event types and/or less role diversity when compared to DocEE. Specifically, we eval-uate on RAMS (Ebner et al., 2020), DiscourseEE (Sharif et al., 2024), and PHEE (Sun et al., 2022). 2

These datasets span a variety of domains (i.e. news articles, social media discourse, and medical text) and text lengths (1-22 sentences). We maintain the cross-domain nature of the task by only using data from DocEE when sourcing in-context examples for data generation. This experiment demonstrates the capability of our proposed methods to gener-ate cross-domain samples, and to generalize across multiple datasets and domains. Note that we take various pre-processing steps to map each of RAMS, DiscourseEE, and PHEE to DocEE’s data format to standardize task structure. Additionally, we provide a style-guide to the LLM to help match the target domain. For instance, in DiscourseEE, a DocEAE dataset sourced from Red-dit, we augment the prompt with the style guide 

> 2Note we only evaluate on DiscourseEE samples in the ‘explicit’ data subset, which contains span annotation.

‘Reddit post from user looking for help with opioid use disorder ’. We sub-sample the training set for each task and evaluate the impact of augmentation when using only 10%, 50% and 100% of the orig-inal training set alongside 500 samples generated using MLG-GPT-4o. Please see Appendix F for more details on experimental setup and additional data preparation steps for each of these tasks. 

4.2 Baseline Augmentation Methods 

While this work is the first to explore document-level EAE data generation, we compare our ap-proach to a relevant EAE augmentation method developed for a sentence-level task and can be adapted for DocEE as it uses no ontological infor-mation: Mask-then-Fill (MTF) (Gao et al., 2022). MTF augments DocEE documents by masking a single contiguous span of non-annotated text in each document and infilling the mask using a T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) model fine-tuned on the Giga-word corpus (Graff et al., 2003). Since MTF was developed for sentence-level tasks, we implement a document-level variant: Doc-MTF. Doc-MTF 

is similar to MTF, except the T5 model is trained to fill masks of larger contiguous spans of non-annotated text in documents from the MultiNews dataset (Fabbri et al., 2019), which is more similar in style and length to DocEE texts than the origi-nal Gigaword corpus. Additionally, Doc-MTF is trained to fill multiple masks in a single document, which enables more diverse augmentations than the original single-mask variant. 

4.3 EAE Models 

In this study, we evaluate the impact of EAE data augmentation using the following EAE models mo-tivated by the DocEE Paper (Tong et al., 2022). 

LongFormer(LF)-Seq: This model treats EAE as a token labeling task. Specifically, for a docu-ment D with tokens {t0, . . . , t n} ∈ D, we label ar-gument spans using the label space {r0, . . . , r n} ∈ 

R, where a given ri denotes an event role. Spans of contiguous tokens with the same label correspond to event arguments. Given that we are process-ing long documents, we use the LongFormer-base (149M parameters) (Beltagy et al., 2020) architec-ture, which can process up to 4096 tokens. 

BERT-QA: This model treats EAE as an extrac-tive question-answering task, inspired by (Du and Cardie, 2020). In this formulation, the question is the argument role, and the context is the document. The goal is to predict the span(s) (start i, end i)25113 Figure 3: Results of training both BERT-QA and LF-Seq with MLG and S2T-augmented training sets at 4x aug-mentation. We compare to models trained with no augmentation (Baseline (No Aug)) and Doc-MTF augmentation. Additionally, we demonstrate the performance of GPT-4o on the EAE task for reference. We find that MLG and S2T-based augmentation provides a significant improvement over baseline models on 0-Shot F1 and RDF1 metrics. Full results tables with statistical significance tests are available in Appendix H. 

corresponding to the argument of the role in the document. Note that for this baseline, we use a BERT-base (110M parameters) (Devlin et al., 2019) model as in the original DocEE paper. We additionally benchmark the capacity of GPT-4o on DocEE. Please refer to Appendix D for de-tails regarding the GPT-4o baseline, as well as all EAE model hyperparameters, compute resources, and training processes. 

4.4 LLMs for Data Generation 

Since MLG uses an in-context learning-based prompting strategy, we can explore a diverse set of LLMs such as (i) Llama 3.1-70b (Dubey et al., 2024), (ii) Mistral-Nemo (Mistral-AI, 2024) (iii) Claude-3.5-Haiku (Anthropic, 2024) (iv) GPT-3.5 (OpenAI, 2024) and (v) GPT-4o (Achiam et al., 2023). S2T, on the contrary, relies on a LangChain implementation which is optimized for OpenAI models, making it challenging to integrate with smaller open-source LLMs. 3 We thus only investi-gate S2T in the context of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o. 

4.5 Evaluation Metrics 

• F1 : We compute an F1 score as in prior work (Tong et al., 2022; Sharif et al., 2024) us-ing the full set of predicted and ground truth triplets. 4

> 3https://www.langchain.com/
> 4Specifically, we use a tuple-based F1 implementation from Peng et al. (2023) to compute overall F1.

• Role-F1 : F1 is limited in its ability to demon-strate performance on challenging role types, as common role types contribute dispropor-tionately to overall performance. Inspired by (Li et al., 2022), we can remove this bias by computing the Role-F1, which computes the F1 score for each role independently , with Role-F1 being the macro average of role-specific F1 scores in a given dataset. Each role thus contributes equally to the F1 score in Role-F1. • 0-Shot F1 : This metric computes Role-F1 on all DocEE 0-shot roles. There are the 9 roles in the target domain test set with no training data. • Role Depth F1 (RDF1) : We introduce a new metric, RDF1, for evaluating cross-domain DocEAE performance for semantically out-lying roles. We use statistical depth (Seeg-miller and Preum, 2023) to identify the top 25% of roles in the target domain that are most semantically outlying for roles in the source domain. RDF1 aims to emphasize per-formance on roles in the target domain that are highly specific to natural disasters, placing less emphasis on roles such as date or loca-tion which are not domain-specific. Statistical depth identifies 16 roles in DocEE as outliers which are used in this evaluation. The set 25114 Figure 4: This figure captures how performance changes on BERT-QA with varying amounts of data augmenta-tion. We explore 2x (small) 4x (medium) 5x (large) and 6x (x-large) augmentation scales. We find that there is a trade-off between optimizing for overall-F1 and F1 for challenging roles on DocEE. 

of outlying roles in the target domain iden-tified by the RDF1 metric align with human judgment 78% of the time. Please refer to Appendix E for additional details on RDF1, including our human-verification of this met-ric. For each metric, we consider the exact match between a set of predicted and ground truth tu-ples consisting of (document id, role type, nor-malized_argument). Each ground truth tuple in our evaluation set contains an argument for a given role. We report the mean of three experimental trials with different random seeds for both the BERT-QA and LF-Seq models. For results including statistical sig-nificance testing using the Wilcoxon signed rank test, please refer to Tables 7 and 8 in the Appendix. 

## 5 Results 

Significant Improvement in F1 Score on Chal-lenging Roles in DocEE: In Figure 3, our results show that both MLG and S2T have the capacity to significantly improve the breadth of roles which can be accurately predicted by a DocEAE model. On BERT-QA, both MLG and S2T provide sig-nificant increases in performance on 0-Shot and RDF1 (i.e. semantically outlying) role subsets. Ad-ditionally, MLG provides a statistically significant increase on Role-F1 when compared to all base-line models. We find that LF-Seq is less perfor-mative than BERT-QA across the board, causing it to under-perform the GPT-4o baseline on certain                                      

> F1 Role F1
> DiscourseEE (10%) 0.13 0.059 DiscourseEE (10%) + Aug 0.334 †0.342 †
> DiscourseEE (50%) 0.163 0.092 DiscourseEE (50%) + Aug 0.361 †0.357 †
> DiscourseEE (Full) 0.18 0.106 DiscourseEE (Full) + Aug 0.403 †0.396 †
> RAMS (10%) 0.134 0.128 RAMS (10%) + Aug 0.214 †0.186 †
> RAMS (50%) 0.323 0.298 RAMS (50%) + Aug 0.343 †0.33 †
> RAMS (Full) 0.388 0.38 RAMS (Full) + Aug 0.393 0.375 PHEE (10%) 0.42 0.303 PHEE (10%) + Aug 0.544 †0.53 †
> PHEE (50%) 0.596 0.581 PHEE (50%) + Aug 0.599 0.594 PHEE (Full) 0.621 0.618 PHEE (Full) + Aug 0.618 0.608

Table 1: Performance of BERT-QA on three EAE datasets using MLG-GPT-4o augmentation. We experi-ment utilizing 10%, 50%, and all of the real training sets for each dataset, alongside 500 synthetic samples. All synthetic data is generated using zero in-domain exem-plars . All results are the mean performance over three experimental trials. Statistically significant performance increases (p < 0.05) are marked †.

metrics. However, similar to BERT-QA, MLG and S2T-based LF-Seq models significantly outperform no augmentation as well as Doc-MTF augmenta-tion on all metrics, highlighting the effectiveness of our approach. We validate the efficacy of MLG on a diverse set of LLMs. 5 We find that closed-source models such as GPT-4o and Claude-3.5-Haiku outperform smaller models such as Mistral-Nemo and Llama-3.1-70b on most metrics. However, models such as Llama-3.1-70b still show strong performance and are a viable open-source option for DocEAE data augmentation. 

Limitations of Classic F1 Score on Challenging Role Type Performance: Our results on DocEE in Figure 3 show that across all experiments for the highest performing model BERT-QA, there is no marked improvement being made by MLG/S2T-augmented models on overall F1 score when com-pared to baseline methods. This is because roles that have significant representation in both the train-ing and testing set often do not benefit from aug-mentation. This is intuitive, as the model can over-fit to high training frequency roles and improve 

> 5Recall that S2T is grounded to an OpenAI-specific imple-mentation of data generation.

25115 overall F1 since the test set is dominated by a small set of common roles . For example, the role Date ,which appears 28 times in the training set (3rd most frequently occurring training role), and 1841 times in the test set, is less likely to benefit from aug-mentation. A model can thus overfit to Date and gain a significant performance increase in overall F1 score. This is in contrast to the role The State of the Volcano (Dormant or Active) that occurs only 52 times in the test set, and never occurs in the training set. Here our methods are well-suited to significantly improve model performance as the model has no prior exposure to such a role type. Thus, MLG and S2T are useful to end-users who wish to increase the diversity of roles that can be extracted by DocEAE models. This phenomena is further evidenced via results in Figure 4, where we see additional augmentation scale has a posi-tive effect on challenging role types, but a mild negative effect on overall F1 score. Future works should thus consider both overall F1 as well as role-specific F1 scores when evaluating EAE mod-els, as breadth of extracted roles is an important characteristic of model capacity. 

MLG Improves Low-Resource Performance on DiscourseEE, RAMS, and PHEE: In Table 1 we explore how our top-performing augmentation model, MLG GPT-4o, improves BERT-QA perfor-mance on DiscourseEE, RAMS, and PHEE. We find that across all experiments, MLG provides a significant performance increase in extremely low-resource settings (i.e. when only 10% of training data is available). Notably, we see that MLG consistently improves overall performance on DiscourseEE by ≈ 20 F1-points. This is an important result as DiscourseEE is naturally very low-resource, highly domain-specific, and contains highly complex argument types. Interestingly, as the amount of training data from the true distri-bution increases for RAMS and PHEE, we find a diminishing impact from MLG augmentation. This occurs for a number of reasons (i) RAMS and PHEE have thousands of annotated training docu-ments, making the impact of 500 MLG-generated samples less important as the full training distri-bution is shown to the model (ii) datasets like RAMS do not utilize semantically meaningful role names, which are the crux of the MLG model which relies only on event schema information. This makes it difficult to model roles like “Instru-ment" which LLMs may assume refer to musical instruments when in fact RAMS uses these terms more abstractly, such as the instrument of destruc-tion in a military attack (iii) LLMs can struggle with argument diversity for certain roles where the LLM’s sampling distribution is narrowly focused on certain tokens. For example, 47% of the MLG-generated arguments for the role pre-existing con-ditions in PHEE are ‘hypertension’. Future works may explore how to increase MLG and S2T argu-ment diversity to further increase performance. 

Should You Use MLG or S2T?: Throughout our experiments, we found that MLG and S2T often perform similarly on a variety of metrics. Thus, what are the use-cases for each approach? 

The Case For MLG: MLG is easily compatible with open-source LLMs, making this more accessi-ble and affordable to the wider research community. Additionally, S2T is reliant on string matching and semantic alignment to map synthetic arguments to document spans. This process may produce mild span annotation errors which can reduce S2T sam-ple quality. MLG does not have this issue as it sim-ply relies on in-filling of masked placeholders, thus providing higher-quality span annotations. S2T is also limited in its reliance on OpenAI models for data generation. 

The Case For S2T: S2T’s advantage over MLG is it’s use of PyDantic objects for structure gen-eration. PyDantic provides additional flexibility to encode additional event structure information in the form of class / variable descriptions. S2T thus provides easier integration of external event information when compared to MLG. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this study, we introduce two novel document-level EAE data generation strategies, MLG and S2T. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our meth-ods across a diverse set of both open-source and proprietary LLMs. Our methods produce high-quality DocEAE annotation and significantly im-prove performance on various metrics across four EAE datasets. On DocEE, we specifically show show strong performance increases on challenging tasks such as extracting 0-shot roles and our new metric for exploring semantically outlying roles. We show that MLG and S2T are impactful augmen-tation strategies for low-resource event modeling and require minimal human efforts for data genera-tion. 25116 7 Limitations 

This work is limited in that we do not explore the capacity of our model to generate large-scale data augmentation with fine-grained control over the role distribution. This was deemed out of scope for this paper due to the cost of data generation and the focus on a few-shot task. Additionally, this is an extremely difficult sub-task that requires a more targeted solution. Future works will explore scaling our framework in this way, on both in-domain and cross-domain formatted tasks. Future works will also explore varying k in our in-context learning based experiments as well as varying the length of the generated samples. A limitation of the S2T model is its reliance on LangChain and OpenAI models. Future works may wish to explore how to adapt this method to a open-source LLMs. Another general limitation of this study is that we do not thoroughly explore the capacity of these methods to generate multi-argument roles. For example, if there are two dif-ferent causes to an event, having the MLG model generate templates for [Cause #1] and [Cause #2]. Such extensions will be the focus of future work. Additionally, a limiting assumption of this work is that each document discusses a single event. We explore EAE data augmentation through this lens as it is the nature of DocEE’s data annotation strat-egy, but future works will explore how to adapt our methods to multi-event documents such as those provided in the WikiEvents dataset (Li et al., 2021). 

## Acknowledgments 

This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation Research Traineeship, Trans-formative Research and Graduate Education in Sen-sor Science, Technology and Innovation (DGE-2125733). 

## References 

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .Anthropic. 2024. Introducing the next generation of claude. Accessed: 2024-12-07. Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. 2020. Longformer: The long-document transformer. 

arXiv:2004.05150 .Samuel Colvin, Eric Jolibois, Hasan Ramezani, Adrian Garcia Badaracco, Terrence Dorsey, David Montague, Serge Matveenko, Marcelo Trylesinski, Sydney Runkle, David Hewitt, Alex Hall, and Victo-rien Plot. 2024. Pydantic. If you use this software, please cite it as above. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. George R Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark A Przy-bocki, Lance A Ramshaw, Stephanie M Strassel, and Ralph M Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content extraction (ace) program-tasks, data, and evaluation. In Lrec , volume 2, pages 837–840. Lisbon. Xinya Du and Claire Cardie. 2020. Event extraction by answering (almost) natural questions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 671–683, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Seth Ebner, Patrick Xia, Ryan Culkin, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2020. Multi-sentence ar-gument linking. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 8057–8077, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alexander R. Fabbri, Irene Li, Tianwei She, Suyi Li, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2019. Multi-news: a large-scale multi-document summarization dataset and abstrac-tive hierarchical model. Jun Gao, Changlong Yu, Wei Wang, Huan Zhao, and Ruifeng Xu. 2022. Mask-then-fill: A flexible and effective data augmentation framework for event ex-traction. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages 4537–4544, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. David Graff, Junbo Kong, Ke Chen, and Kazuaki Maeda. 2003. English gigaword. Linguistic Data Consor-tium, Philadelphia , 4(1):34. LangChain. 2024. Data generation use cases in langchain. https://python.langchain.com/ docs/use_cases/data_generation/ . Accessed: 2024-12-09. 25117 Rui Li, Wenlin Zhao, Cheng Yang, and Sen Su. 2022. A dual-expert framework for event argument extrac-tion. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1110–1121. Sha Li, Heng Ji, and Jiawei Han. 2021. Document-level event argument extraction by conditional generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 894–908, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Jian Liu, Yufeng Chen, and Jinan Xu. 2021. Machine reading comprehension as data augmentation: A case study on implicit event argument extraction. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2716– 2725, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jian Liu, Chen Liang, and Jinan Xu. 2022. Document-level event argument extraction with self-augmentation and a cross-domain joint training mech-anism. Knowledge-Based Systems , 257:109904. Mingyu Derek Ma, Alexander Taylor, Wei Wang, and Nanyun Peng. 2023a. DICE: Data-efficient clinical event extraction with generative models. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 15898–15917, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mingyu Derek Ma, Xiaoxuan Wang, Po-Nien Kung, P. Jeffrey Brantingham, Nanyun Peng, and Wei Wang. 2023b. Star: Improving low-resource information extraction by structure-to-text data generation with large language models. Yubo Ma, Zehao Wang, Yixin Cao, Mukai Li, Meiqi Chen, Kun Wang, and Jing Shao. 2022. Prompt for extraction? PAIE: Prompting argument interaction for event argument extraction. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6759–6774, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Mistral-AI. 2024. Mistral nemo. Accessed: 2024-12-07. Hiroki Nakayama. 2018. seqeval: A python framework for sequence labeling evaluation. Software available from https://github.com/chakki-works/seqeval. OpenAI. 2024. Gpt-3.5 turbo model. Accessed: 2024-12-08. Tanmay Parekh, I-Hung Hsu, Kuan-Hao Huang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Nanyun Peng. 2023. GENEVA: Benchmarking generalizability for event argument extraction with hundreds of event types and argument roles. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3664–3686, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Feng Yao, Kaisheng Zeng, Lei Hou, Juanzi Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Weixing Shen. 2023. The devil is in the details: On the pitfalls of event extraction evaluation. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pages 9206–9227, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,21(140):1–67. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019a. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Association for Computational Linguistics. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019b. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Taneeya Satyapanich, Francis Ferraro, and Tim Finin. 2020. Casie: Extracting cybersecurity event informa-tion from text. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 34(05):8749–8757. Parker Seegmiller and Sarah Preum. 2023. Statistical depth for ranking and characterizing transformer-based text embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 9600–9611, Singapore. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Omar Sharif, Joseph Gatto, Madhusudan Basak, and Sarah Masud Preum. 2024. Explicit, implicit, and scattered: Revisiting event extraction to capture com-plex arguments. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 12061–12081, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Stephanie Strassel, Tom Riese, Justin Mott, Joe Ellis, Jonathan Wright, Seth Kulick, Neville Ryant, and Xiaoyi Ma. 2015. From light to rich ERE: Annotation of entities, relations, and events. In Proceedings of the The 3rd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation , pages 89–98, Denver, Colorado. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Zhaoyue Sun, Jiazheng Li, Gabriele Pergola, Byron Wallace, Bino John, Nigel Greene, Joseph Kim, and 25118 Yulan He. 2022. PHEE: A dataset for pharmacovigi-lance event extraction from text. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 5571–5587, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. MeiHan Tong, Bin Xu, Shuai Wang, Meihuan Han, Yixin Cao, Jiangqi Zhu, Siyu Chen, Lei Hou, and Juanzi Li. 2022. DocEE: A large-scale and fine-grained benchmark for document-level event extrac-tion. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-gies , pages 3970–3982, Seattle, United States. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(86):2579–2605. Bo Wang, Heyan Huang, Xiaochi Wei, Ge Shi, Xiao Liu, Chong Feng, Tong Zhou, Shuaiqiang Wang, and Dawei Yin. 2023. Boosting event extraction with de-noised structure-to-text augmentation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 11267–11281, Toronto, Canada. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. 2019. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR ,abs/1910.03771. Xianjun Yang, Yujie Lu, and Linda Petzold. 2023a. Few-shot document-level event argument extraction. In 

Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8029–8046, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yuqing Yang, Qipeng Guo, Xiangkun Hu, Yue Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, and Zheng Zhang. 2023b. An AMR-based link prediction approach for document-level event argument extraction. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12876– 12889, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. 

## A DocEE Dataset Statistics 

In this section we describe the statistics of the Do-cEE dataset as well as the statistics of the generated data used to augment DocEE in Figure 3. 

A.1 DocEE Split # Samples # Events # Argument Instances             

> Source Train 23,630 49 154,225 Target Train 50 10 308 Target Dev 1,850 10 11,094 Target Test 1,955 10 13,227

Table 2: DocEE data distribution. The source domain contains annotation for over 23k documents across 49 different event types. The target domain contains an-notation for documents with 10 distinct event types, all under the common theme of “Natural Disasters". 

A.2 Generated Data Statistics                        

> Num Sent Num Words Arg Mentions Per-Doc MLG-GPT-3.5 9.84 224.91 11.96 MLG-GPT-4o 10.52 253.21 12.98 MLG-Mistral-Nemo 10.25 249.76 12.84 MLG-Llama-3.1-70b 10.34 237.7 13.96 MLG-Claude-3.5-Haiku 10.68 243.5 12.72 S2T-GPT-4o 13.4 344.45 15.14 S2T-GPT-3.5 11.52 275.87 19.23

Table 3: Generated data statistics from each model. Each column represents the average statistic for each category across all generated documents used in our results table. 

## B Additional Details — Mad Lib Generation 

In this section, we provide additional details of the Mad Lib Generation augmentation module. 

B.1 Hyperparameters 

1. In-Context Learning: We use k=3 in-context examples when performing MLG-based gen-eration. 2. Temperature: For OpenAI and Claude mod-els, we use temperature = 1.0 to maxmize out-put diversity. For smaller models, we found lower temperatures were helpful in producing the correct output structure. Thus, for Mistral-Nemo and Llama-3.1-70b we use temperature = 0.35 and 0.3 respectively. 25119 B.2 Mad Lib Generation Data Quality Controls 

To ensure high-quality data, we post-process our generated Mad Libs. An error that can occur during this process is hallucinated role types . For exam-ple, if the LLM invents a new role not found in the event schema when generating the Mad Lib, we may handle this in two ways: (i) we can use SBERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019b), a popu-lar textual embedding method, to encode the hal-lucinated category name and compute the cosine similarity between it and all possible role names for a given sample. We can often reliably match the generated category to the true category using this method for mild hallucinations (e.g. mapping “The place" back to “Location"). (ii) For smaller LLMs we find hallucinations can be more extreme, thus we simply remove the sentence containing the hallucinated role from the document. Since Do-cEE is largely comprised of news articles, simply removing the sentence is a non-destructive way to deal with hallucination as the documents are often comprised of a sequence of factual statements. In our experiments, we focus on method (ii) as it is less ambiguous and works with all models. Additionally, the generation of a longer text will be particularly sensitive to the randomly drawn few-shot sample selection. Thus, there can be outlying generation attempts where Mad Libs are generated (i) with little to no role information (ii) with incor-rectly used brackets (iii) with improperly formatted solutions. When this happens, we simply draw a new set of few-shot examples and try again. Note: this issue becomes increasingly rare as model qual-ity increases. 

B.3 Prompts MLG Generator: 

“A MadLib is a templated text document with masked placeholders that users fill with specified word categories to com-plete the content. Write a madlib for a “{event_type}" event. Use the following categories for Mad Lib blanks. Make sure all categories appear in the MadLib. Do not generate any other categories. Write the MadLib in the style of a {style_guide}: Categories: {categories} Madlib:" 

MLG Solver 

“A MadLib is a templated text document with masked placeholders that users fill with specified word categories to com-plete the content. Solve the MadLib. Fill-in missing infor-mation in the document. Return your answer as a bulleted list of the format “### CATEGORY: ANSWER". Make sure the following categories are in your solution: {categories} Madlib: {madlib} MadLib Solution:" 

## C Additional Details — Struct2Text 

C.1 Hyperparameters 

1. In-Context Learning: We use k=3 in-context examples when performing S2T-based gener-ation. Note that ICL is only used for structure generation in S2T. 2. Temperature: We use temperature = 1.0 for all S2T experiments. 3. S2T Aligner α: The threshold used to de-termine a valid match between synthetic argu-ment and document span is 0.6. We choose this threshold empirically after manual inspec-tion of automated argument mappings. 

C.2 Struct2Text Data Quality Controls 

Much of the data quality control comes from the S2T Alignment module. However, other small data quality controls are implemented as part of S2T. 

JSON Error Handling: S2T’s reliance on out-putting valid JSON can introduce random gener-ation errors. Similar to MLG, we thus allow S2T multiple attempts at generation in the event of such errors. 

Generated Data Processing: (i) We transform the data into lower-case to facilitate string matching (ii) We search for and filter empty event arguments which can come in various forms such as null val-ues or the string “None". 

C.3 Prompts Structure2Text Generator We adapt the default prompt from (LangChain, 2024) for document-level tasks. 25120 “Given the following fields, create a doc-ument about them. Make the document detailed and interesting. Use every given field. If any additional preferences are given, use them during document con-struction as well. Fields: {fields} Preferences: {prefer-ences} Document:" We control the style and length of the output using the preferences field. 

## D Baseline Models 

We train all models on Google Colab using an NVIDIA A100 GPU. Throughout the course of the project, we estimate an upper limit of 150 compute hours. Details of our baseline models are found in the following sections. 

D.1 BERT-QA 

All of the BERT-QA experiments are run using the Huggingface (Wolf et al., 2019) Transformers library. We use a BERT-base model (110m param-eters) 6 as our base model. Given that BERT has a max token length of 512, we process longer doc-uments in chunks using a stride of 50 tokens. All models are fine-tuned for 3 epochs using the default Huggingface Trainer parameters. 7 When appli-cable (i.e., when a development set is available), validation is loss is used for model selection. To help encourage extraction of multi-argument roles, we only include unique arguments as training examples for QA-based extraction. During infer-ence, we take up to 2 predictions per-question. We perform inference using the Huggingface question-answering pipeline. We consider roles present in test set during evaluation. We use a batch size of 48 for all BERT-QA experiments and train our models on Google Colab use an NVIDIA A100 GPU. 

D.2 LongFormer-Seq 

All LongFormer-Seq experiments use the LongFormer-base (149M parameters) 8 and are run using the Huggingface Transformers library. In our cross-domain experiment, we fine-tune the model for 3-epochs on the source training set with default parameters. For cross-domain fine-tuning, 

> 6bert-base-uncased
> 7https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/ main_classes/trainer
> 8allenai/longformer-base-4096

we train the source model with a new classification head for the target events for up to 10 epochs using validation F1 score from SeqEval (Nakayama, 2018) to determine the best model. We use a batch size of 4 for all LongFormer experiments and train our models on Google Collab use an NVIDIA A100 GPU. 

D.3 Evaluation Metrics 

We use an implementation of F1 score for EAE from the OmniEvent library (Peng et al., 2023). When computing F1, since the same argument can be expressed in slightly different ways throughout a document, we normalize the argument string be-fore evaluation using a function provided by the DocEE authors. This makes outputs lowercase, re-moves articles, white space, and punctuation. For example, If the prediction was (0, date, The 14th of May.), normalization would return (0, date, 14th of may). This is helpful since the same argument can be expressed in many slightly different ways throughout a long document. 

D.4 LLM EAE Baseline Details 

Our LLM-based EAE baselines use the following prompt to perform Event Argument Extraction. 

##Instruction## Concisely extract the arguments for following roles from the document. Make sure the extracted arguments are found directly in the text as substrings. Use the provided role descriptions to extract arguments as a JSON. Return ’null’ if any arugment is not present in the document. Concisely give the output as requested, no extra description is needed. ##Roles Descriptions## {role_descriptions} ##Document## {document} Return "null" if any arugment is not present. Return arguments in JSON. Separate multiple arguments of a role values by semicolon (;). 25121 If the LLM outputs a multiple arguments for a role separated by a semicolon (;), we split these into separate predicted tuples before evlauation. 

## E RDF1 Evaluation 

E.1 Role-Depth-F1 (RDF1) 

RDF1 is a performance metric which aims to evalu-ate how well cross-domain EAE models are predict-ing role types that are semantically different from those observed in the source domain. To compute RDF1, we propose using transformer-based text embeddings (TTE) depth (Seegmiller and Preum, 2023) to identify the degree to which target do-main roles deviate semantically from source do-main roles. Formally, given a set of source domain roles, {s1, s 2, . . . , s n} = S, and a set of target domain roles, {t1, t 2, . . . , t m} = T , TTE depth as-signs a score to each target role ti ∈ T indicating how well ti represents S.We embed each role in each set using SBERT  

> 9

(Reimers and Gurevych, 2019b) to get a set of source role embeddings {s′

> 1

, . . . , s ′

> n

} = S′ and a set of target role embeddings {t′

> 1

, . . . , t ′

> m

} = T ′.TTE depth scores each target role embedding t′ 

> i

∈

T ′ according to 

Dδ(t′

> i

, S ′) := 2 − ES′ [δ(t′, H )] (1) where H ∼ S′ is a random variable with uni-form distribution over S′, and δ is cosine distance. 

> Figure 5: Visualization showing how TTE Depth ranks DocEE roles. We find that roles such as “Maximum Wind Speed", “Damaged Crops & Livestock" and “Mag-nitude (Tsunami Heights)" are outliers compared to roles such as “Influence People" and “Temporary Settle-ment".
> 9all-MiniLM-L6-v2

TTE depth thus assigns each target role ti ∈

T a score, with higher scores indicating that the target role is representative of the source roles ( S), and lower scores indicating that the target role is a semantic outlier with respect to the source roles. We formalize RDF1 as follows. First, consider a set of predicted tuples P and ground truth tuples 

G, where each tuple gi ∈ G is formatted as gi =(document-id , role , ˆargument ). We define Role F1, i.e. the F1 score for a single role, as Role F1 (ti) = F1( ˆPti , ˆGti ) (2) Where ˆPti and ˆGti are the subset of all tuples in 

P and G respectively, which have arguments for role ti. We then define RDF1 as the mean Role F1

for only semantically outlying roles           

> RDF 1 = 1
> k
> m∑
> i=1
> 
> Role F1(ti)if Dδ(t′
> i, S ′)< τ
> 0if Dδ(t′
> i, S ′)> τ
> (3)

Where m is the total number of roles in the test set, and k is the number of roles ti ∈ T which have Dδ(t′

> i

, S ′) < τ , and τ is the depth threshold chosen to extract the top 25% most semantically outlying roles. We choose 25% for this TTE depth threshold as it strikes a good balance between filter-ing for target roles that differ from source domain roles, while maintaining a good amount of roles for evaluation. By computing F1 only on these roles, i.e., RDF1, we measure the ability of an FSCD EAE model to perform domain transfer to roles that deviate semantically from the source domain. In Figure 5, we visualize how depth scores rank all roles in the target domain with respect to the source domain. In DocEE, 16 roles comprise the set of seman-tic outliers evaluated in RDF1. We additionally note that the embedding strategy for creating S

and T from RS and RT is flexible; event ontolo-gies that include additional information, such as role descriptions or valid entity types may be used to enrich the role representations. Since DocEE provides no such information, opting instead for using semantically-rich role names, the role names themselves are used. 

E.2 Full List of RDF1 Roles for DocEE 

Maximum Wind Speed, Storm Move-ment Speed, Maximum Rainfall, Mag-nitude (Tsunami heights), Related Rivers 25122 or Lakes, Influenced Crops and Liveli-hood, Water Level, Amount of Precip-itation, Damaged Crops & Livestock, Number of Damaged Houses, Number of Rebuilding House, Fire Warning Level, Storm Formation Location, The State of the Volcano (Dormant or Active), Tsunami Warning Level, Number of In-fluenced People, 

E.3 Human Evaluation of RDF1 Classes 

To ensure that the cross-domain roles identified by RDF1 align with human judgment, we have two human annotators perform the following analysis. 1. Each annotator is familiar with the DocEE dataset, and reads through the full list of 60 roles in the cross-domain data split, whose theme is natural disasters. 2. Each annotator then is asked to select any role which does not appear to be specific to natural disasters. In other words, the annotators ask themselves "is it likely that this role pertains to something which is not natural disaster." An example of this could be the role "location". 3. The resulting annotation produces a human filtered role set, which RDF1 roles should not 

include in evaluation. 4. We then compare the human filtered role set to our automatically extracted RDF1 roles. The percentage of roles humans believe should have been filtered, which are found in the RDF1 roles, is determined to be the error rate of the model. 5. We report the 1 - (mean error rate) from both annotators as our assessment of human-RDF1 alignment. Our results show that RDF1 roles align with human judgment 78.1% of the time. Common roles which were filtered by humans, but not RDF1, include Number of Influenced People and Water Level. 

Annotator Details: The annotators who per-formed this analysis were two graduate students in Computer Science who live in the United States. The annotation was done as part of their normal research practice and took less than 30 minutes to complete. 

## F Additional Dataset Information 

F.1 PHEE F.1.1 Dataset Pre-Processing 

We convert PHEE into DocEE format by taking the following steps: • As in DocEE, we do not consider triggers and ignore them during pre-processing. • PHEE has a hierarchical argument structure consisting of main and sub arguments. We concatenate the main and sub arguments into one large argument set to align evaluation across all tasks. • Given that we have merged main and sub ar-guments, we manually correct an overlapping role name “disorder" which occurs both in the context of subjects and treatments. If we are in the context of a subject, we denote disorder as pre_existing_condition and if we are in the context of a treatment, we denote disorder as 

disorder_treated .• The train, development, and test splits of PHEE remain unchanged and are sourced directly from https://github.com/ ZhaoyueSun/phee-with-chatgpt/ 

F.1.2 Dataset Distribution Split # Samples # Events # Argument Instances          

> Train 2,898 214,536 Dev 961 24,894 Test 968 24,952
> Table 4: PHEE Data Distribition

F.2 DiscourseEE F.2.1 Dataset Pre-Processing 

We convert DiscourseEE into DocEE format by taking the following steps: • DiscourseEE is a trigger-free dataset with hierarchical annotation for event arguments. We use the provided train, development, and test splits from https://github.com/ omar-sharif03/DiscourseEE.git .• DiscourseEE includes both explicit arguments (those which are found as spans of a docu-ment) as well as implicit and scattered argu-ments (which can be inferred through context). 25123 As DocEE is an extractive task, we consider only the explicit subset of DiscourseEE. • As DiscourseEE only provides string annota-tions, we map the explicit arguments back to the text using substring/boundary matching approaches. 

F.2.2 Data Distribution Split # Samples # Events # Argument Instances          

> Train 246 3869 Dev 50 3194 Test 100 3392
> Table 5: DiscourseEE Data Distribution. Note we only explore explicit arguments in DiscoursEE as Implicit and Scattered arguments are not extractive tasks.

F.3 RAMS F.3.1 Dataset Pre-Processing 

We convert RAMS into DocEE format by taking the following steps: • We download the RAMS dataset from https: //nlp.jhu.edu/rams/RAMS_1.0c.tar.gz 

and leverage a RAMS pre-processing script provided by OmniEvent (Peng et al., 2023). We use the provided train, development, and test splits. • We ignore all triggers to map the problem onto DocEE format. • As RAMS is trigger-centric and single-event, there can be many duplicate documents. We thus drop duplicates during pre-processing. This makes the dataset slightly smaller than the original RAMS dataset. 

F.3.2 Data Distribution Split # Samples # Events # Argument Instances          

> Train 6322 139 14612 Dev 800 127 1894 Test 770 128 1771
> Table 6: RAMS Data Distribution after pre-processing.

## G Visualizing Document Similarity 

In Figure 6 we visualize the similarity between real DocEE test documents and MLG-GPT-4o outputs using t-SNE (van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008). 

## H Additional Results 

In this section, we provide full results tables for DocEE Evaluation in Figure 3. We note that the implementation of the LLM-baseline employed re-lies on LLMs outputting valid JSON, which made evaluation of smaller LLMs (e.g. LLama) chal-lenging, i.e., they ended up yielding much lower f1-score as some outputs could not be properly evaluated due to JSON errors. We thus focused our baseline on GPT-4o. We note that GPT-3.5 was a suitable model, producing an F1, Role-F1, 0-Shot, and RDF1 of 0.177, 0.162, 0.122, and 0.171 respec-tively. However, as GPT-4o was much stronger, we highlight these results in the paper. 

## I Example Data 

In this section, we provide various examples of out-puts from MLG and S2T on our various evaluation tasks. 25124 Figure 6: In this figure, we use SBERT to embed 100 documents generated by MLG-GPT-4o as well as 100 documents sampled from the DocEE target test set. Circular markers ( ◦) denote real test samples, while square markers ( □) denote MLG-generated data. We specifically sample 10 documents per-event type from each source. We find that for many classes, MLG data is highly similar to ground truth data. 

F1 Role F1 0-Shot F1 RDF1 

Baselines 

Baseline (No Aug) 0.288 0.214 0.141 0.164 Doc-MTF 0.304 0.243 0.184 0.175 GPT-4o 0.212 0.206 0.14 0.215 

Mad Lib Generation 

GPT-3.5 0.291 0.261 0.264* 0.259* GPT-4o 0.299 0.275* 0.308* 0.271* Mistral-Nemo 0.284 0.259 0.224 0.257* Claude-3.5-Haiku 0.303 0.279* 0.263* 0.274* Llama-3.1-70b 0.294 0.262 0.281* 0.254* 

Struct2Text 

GPT-3.5 0.29 0.245 0.311* 0.251* GPT-4o 0.279 0.248 0.297* 0.262* 

Table 7: Results of BERT-QA on DocEE. Augmentation results which are statistically significant (p < 0.05) with respect to all 3 baselines are marked ‘*’. 25125 F1 Role F1 0-Shot F1 RDF1 

Baselines 

Baseline (No Aug) 0.218 0.06 0.0 0.004 Doc-MTF 0.213 0.084 0.0 0.036 GPT-4o 0.212 0.206 0.14 0.215 

Mad Lib Generation 

GPT-3.5 0.25* 0.140 † 0.063 † 0.084 †

GPT-4o 0.251* 0.156 † 0.079 † 0.128 †

Mistral-Nemo 0.241* 0.145 † 0.065 † 0.106 †

Claude-3.5-Haiku 0.25* 0.148 † 0.073 † 0.085 †

Llama-3.1-70b 0.237* 0.144 † 0.085 † 0.080 †

Struct2Text 

GPT-3.5 0.232* 0.124 † 0.083 † 0.080 †

GPT-4o 0.246* 0.138 † 0.083 † 0.098 †

Table 8: Results of LF-Seq on DocEE. Augmentation results which are a statistically significant (p < 0.05) improvement with respect to only Doc-MTF and Baseline (No-Aug) are marked †. Results showing a statistically significant improvement compared to all 3 baselines are marked *. 

Figure 7: Example data from MLG-GPT-4o on DocEE. 25126 Figure 8: Example data from S2T-GPT-4o on DocEE. 25127 Figure 9: Example data from MLG-Claude-3.5-Haiku on DocEE. 25128 Figure 10: Example data from MLG-Mistral Nemo on DocEE. 

Figure 11: Example data from MLG-Llama-3.1-70b on DocEE. 25129 Figure 12: Example data from MLG-GPT-4o on RAMS. 

Figure 13: Example data from MLG-GPT-4o on PHEE. 

Figure 14: Example data from MLG-GPT-4o on DiscourseEE. 25130 Figure 15: Example real sample from DocEE for the event “Floods". Can be compared to a synthetic sample for the same event in Figure 16. 

Figure 16: MLG-GPT-4o generation for the DocEE event “Floods". Can be compared with a real sample from this event in Figure 15. 25131