Title: 2024.findings-acl.515.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.515.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 29 Oct 2024 12:31:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 8702–8718 August 11-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics Fact-and-Reflection (FaR) Improves Confidence Calibration of Large Language Models 

Xinran Zhao 1,2,∗ Hongming Zhang 1 Xiaoman Pan 1 Wenlin Yao 1

Dong Yu 1 Tongshuang Wu 2 Jianshu Chen 11Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, 2Carnegie Mellon University 

Abstract 

For a LLM to be trustworthy, its confidence level should be well calibrated with its actual performance. While it is now common sense that LLM performances are greatly impacted by prompts, the confidence calibration in prompt-ing LLMs has yet to be thoroughly explored. In this paper, we explore how different prompting strategies influence LLM confidence calibra-tion and how it could be improved. We conduct extensive experiments on six prompting meth-ods in the question-answering context and we observe that, while these methods help improve the expected LLM calibration, they also trigger LLMs to be over-confident when responding to some instances. Inspired by human cognition, we propose Fact-and-Reflection (FaR) prompt-ing, which improves the LLM calibration in two steps. First, FaR elicits the known “facts” that are relevant to the input prompt from the LLM. And then it asks the model to “reflect” over them to generate the final answer. Ex-periments show that FaR prompting achieves significantly better calibration; it lowers the Expected Calibration Error by 23.5% on our multi-purpose QA tasks. Notably, FaR prompt-ing even elicits the capability of verbally ex-pressing concerns in less confident scenarios, which helps trigger retrieval augmentation for solving these harder instances. 

1 Introduction 

With the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2022, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2023), various prompting strategies have been proposed for improving the LLM performance .It is now common sense that well-designed prompts can help elicit desirable capabilities from LLMs  

> ∗

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue. Corresponding contact email addresses: {xin-ranz3,sherryw}@andrew.cmu.edu, {hongmingzhang, xiao-manpan ,wenlinyao,dyu,jianshuchen}@global.tencent.com. Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/ colinzhaoust/fact-and-reflection .Can  sunlight  travel  to  the  deepest  part                                                 

> of the Black Sea?
> Answer my question with your
> confidence on the answer.
> It can not, my confidence is 95%.
> Can sunlight travel to the deepest part
> of the Black Sea?
> Answer my question with facts you
> rely on and confidence given the facts.
> It can not. My confidence is 98%
> Facts:1.Sunlight penetration ability… 2.Life in anoxic conditions …
> fef7e0

Figure 1: An example of how different prompting meth-ods affect confidence extraction: model verbalized con-fidence of GPT-3.5 increases when asking the model to elicit the facts it relies on to answer the question. 

that are important for various tasks. For exam-ple, Chain-of-Thought and its variants have been widely used for unlocking LLM reasoning capabili-ties (Liu et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023; Press et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023). However, what is less studied is the fact that prompting also influences the model confidence in their responses. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the LLM’s verbalized confidence (Lin et al., 2022) would shift when it is asked to simply first seek sup-porting facts. Effective confidence calibration of LLMs — output confidence scores matching model performance — is crucial because calibrated confi-dence ensures the model reliability and helps guide practical use cases, e.g., identifying potential hal-lucinations (Kadavath et al., 2022; Varshney et al., 2023), applying additional fact-checking (Chen et al., 2021), etc. Beyond inference time usage, it can also help guide the training process, e.g., improving instruction tuning (Chung et al., 2022). Therefore, one central question we want to answer is: how do different prompting methods influence the confidence calibration? 

To do so, we first start by assessing six different 

8702 prompting strategies, on Question-Answering (QA) datasets that rely on reasoning (Geva et al., 2021) and knowledge (Bordes et al., 2014). In our assess-ment, we employ confidence calibration , specifi-cally Expected Calibration Error (ECE) (Guo et al., 2017) and Macro Calibration Error (MacroCE) (Si et al., 2022), to measure the discrepancy between a model’s performance and its confidence levels. They are widely recognized metrics for evaluating the quality of confidence scores in models, as dis-cussed in prior studies (Desai and Durrett, 2020; Si et al., 2023). We find that different prompting methods generally suffer from over-confidence , and exhibit poor calibration at the instance level. Psychological and cognitive research (Block and Harper, 1991; George et al., 2000) indicates that human’s over-confidence can be mitigated by dis-entangling the processes of fact acquisition and rea-soning. Instead of reasoning while stating the facts, explicitly recalling all relevant facts before delib-eration can avoid early anchoring the reasoning process onto the first upcoming fact in the context. Accordingly, we propose our Fact-and-Reflection (FaR) prompting to improve model confidence cali-bration — see Figure 2 for an example. Specifically, it consists of three steps: first, prompting the model for potential known facts and their sources, second, eliciting reflective reasoning to connect all recalled knowledge, and finally, generating the answer. Our experiments on aforementioned datasets demonstrate that FaR prompting significantly re-duces the confidence calibration error across vari-ous calibration measures (23.5% and 13.9% under ECE and MacroCE, respectively). Further analysis reveals that the improvement comes from that FaR prompting intrigues the model to generate cautious answers that express concerns, such as adding a comment like “there is no suf-ficient evidence” after the answer. We observe that expressing concerns co-occurs with an average of 13.2% reduction in confidence relative to the situations without expressing concerns . This phe-nomenon can suggest a potential mechanism that helps detect hard instances that are not answerable with LLM’s internal knowledge and may benefit from retrieval augmented generation. In summary, our main contributions are: 1. We study how different prompting methods influence confidence calibration and find that many methods, though generally being helpful, suffer from the over-confidence issue. Question:  what  does  Jamaican  people  speak?                                                    

> What are the facts needed to answer this question?
> Supporting Facts:
> 1. Jamaican people typically speak English …
> 2. Jamaican Creole or Patois is one commonly …
> Given above facts you provided, what are the sources?
> Sources:
> 1. https://www.babbel.com/en/magazine/what-
> language-do-jamaicans-speak
> 2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamaican_Creole
> Given above facts provided, what is your reasoning?
> Reasoning:
> There are two languages they speak …
> Therefore, choose afinal answer.
> Answer: English and Creole
> Fact
> Re fl ection
> Answer

Figure 2: An example of the proposed FaR prompt-ing, which consists of three steps: fact, reflection, and answer. Before answering the question and extracting the confidence scores, FaR explicitly decomposes the entire process into fact elicitation (with corresponding sources) and reflectively reasoning over the facts. The answers will then be utilized in the prompt to gener-ate the final answer. Highlighted text denotes the input prompts provided to the model. 

2. We propose FaR prompting that improves model confidence calibration across various common metrics. 3. We show that FaR prompting mitigates over-confidence . Moreover, FaR prompting elicits the model to express concerns when answering questions they are uncertain of. 

2 How do Prompting Strategies Influence Confidence Calibration in LLMs? 

To examine the influence of different prompting strategies on the confidence calibration of LLMs, we follow Tian et al. (2023) and conduct our ex-periments on QA. Specifically, we use QA datasets that mainly examine either reasoning (StrategyQA, Geva et al., 2021) or knowledge (Web Questions. Bordes et al., 2014) where the confidence calibra-tion is important due to the reliability requirement. An example question would be, “Did Aristotle use a laptop?”. The answers are either in the format of Yes/No or a set of short phrases, e.g., “English and Creole”. We report the macro-average scores for two kinds of QA data. Following Wei et al. (2022a), we conduct all of our experiments using OpenAI’s GPT-3 ( text-davinci-003 , Ouyang et al., 2022) 1.We set the default max output length to 120 and the temperature to 1.2. 

> 1At the time of writing, this model was the only one that both has sufficient reasoning capability for solving StrategyQA and provides access to the logits (necessary for confidence cal-culation). Experiments with other models are in Section 3.4.

8703 2.1 Evaluation Metrics 

We follow the conventional approach (Guo et al., 2017; Desai and Durrett, 2020; Si et al., 2022), and measure the confidence score quality with confi-dence calibration : the error between model per-formance and confidence scores across instances. Lower errors indicate better calibration and thus, higher accuracy in confidence scores. We measure model performance with the exact match criterion, where an answer is deemed correct if it matches a candidate label after normalization. Then, following Si et al. (2022), we use both Ex-pected Calibration Error (ECE, Guo et al., 2017) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE, Si et al., 2022) to evaluate the quality of confi-dence calibration . Both metrics are based on the difference between the confidence scores and the correctness of model predictions. • ECE uses a bucketing approach that measures the 

overall calibration . It assigns examples with similar confidence to the same buckets. Given the input x, ground truth y, prediction ˜y, and 

Bm denoting the m-th bucket for ( x,y,˜y), for N

model predictions bucketed into M buckets: ECE = 1

N

> M

∑

> m=1

|Bm| · | Acc (Bm) − Conf (Bm)|,

where Acc (Bm) and Conf (Bm) denote the ac-curacy and averaged confidence for the samples in Bm, and |Bm| denotes the cardinality of Bm.Such definition triggers bucket-canceling effect ,i.e., the over- and under- confident instances within the same bucket may cancel with each other and hence not contribute to the overall er-ror. As a result, ECE provides a stable overall measure of how well the confidence matches the expected accuracy — A single outlier (e.g., ex-tremely high confidence for a wrong prediction) will not affect the global ECE too much. • MacroCE is the (macro) average of the following two instance-level calibration errors (ICE), which measures the ICE for the Np correctly and Nn

incorrectly predicted samples, respectively: ICE pos = 1

NpNp

∑

> i=1

(1 − Conf (xi, ˜yi)) , ∀iyi = ˜ yi,

ICE neg = 1

NnNn∑

> i=1

(Conf (xi, ˜yi) − 0) , ∀iyi̸ = ˜ yi.

MacroCE does not have the bucket-canceling ef-fects, provides more granularity, and is more reflec-tive of instance-level confidence calibration . For example, consider a set of two predictions {1, 0}

with labels {0, 0}. When the corresponding con-fidence scores are {1, 0}, assume they are in the same bucket, the output of ECE will be 0, as the difference between the average confidence scores and accuracy. Therefore, the high error extreme instances are not captured by ECE (e.g., wrong, but conf = 1 ). In contrast, each instance contributes to MacroCE (equals 1 in this case), which reveals more instance-level effects than ECE. 

2.2 Prompting Methods 

We examine how different prompting methods in-fluence confidence calibration. Besides Standard 

prompting, we categorize the strategies into two kinds: Step Decomposition and Multi-Candidate Selection (examples in Figure 7 in the appendix). 

Step Decomposition prompts guide the model to output multiple steps of thoughts or knowledge that may facilitate answering the question in the final step. We consider three common ones: 1. Knowledge prompting (Liu et al., 2022): We insert a prompt “Generate some knowledge about the question:” after the original question, and have the model generate the final answer based on the generated knowledge. We also explore a minor variant: Knowledge+Explain ,which denotes changing the final prompt from “Answer:” to “Explain and Answer:”. 2. Chain-of-Thought prompting (CoT, Wei et al., 2022b): We have the model generate chained reasoning before the final answer. We fol-low (Kojima et al., 2023) to conduct zero-shot CoT by adding a prompt “Let’s think step by step:” after the original question. 3. Self-ask (Press et al., 2023): we have the model decompose the original question into mul-tiple sub-questions, generate the intermediate answers, and combine them in the prompt to get the final answer. In detail, we first ask the model “Are follow-up questions needed?”. If not, we directly get the final answer; Otherwise, we ask the model to generate the follow-up ques-tions and the corresponding intermediate an-swers. All these intermediate steps are included in the final prompt (“Question:<question>; In-termediate Questions and Answers: <generated question-answer pairs> Answer:”). Self-Ask (ag-8704 Question:  what  does  Jamaican  people  speak?                            

> Answer: English and Creole
> English and Creole
> Possible Answer: English and Creole
> Is the Possible Answer: (A) True (B) False
> Answer: A
> Answer: Jamaican Creole and English
> Confidence(0-1): 0.9
> 0.8 0.5 0.8 Token Prob.
> P(True)
> Verbalized Conf.
> 0.8

Figure 3: Different methods for computing confidence scores. The numbers in green denote the token proba-bility of the output sequences. Highlighted texts denote input prompts provided to the model. Note that Both P(True) and Verbalized Confidence can be considered as suffix prompting methods that obtain the confidence scores after the model outputs its answer. 

gregate) denotes the variant that asks the model to answer all the intermediate questions together in a one-step generation. On the other hand, Multi-candidate Selection 

methods acquire the final answer through querying the model for multiple rounds and selecting a can-didate with pseudo discussion or majority voting. We examine the following two (we extract their confidence scores after the final answer): 4. Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023): We have the model generate the answers multiple times with the standard prompt, and select the final answer through a majority vote. We follow the original work to sample 10 different outputs with a temperature 0.7. 5. Tree-of-Thought prompting (ToT, Yao et al., 2023): We follow the naming protocol by Hul-bert (2023), and have the model to perform state-aware generation and search, by mimicking mul-tiple experts discussing the input questions in pseudo conversations. We denote our method as pseudo-ToT since the search steps are not conducted with a separate module. 

2.3 Confidence Extraction Methods 

To obtain confidence scores , we examine three widely used methods in literatures (Figure 3): • Token Prob. : Computed by averaging the top-1 log probability of each token over the entire se-quence, and then applying the exponential. This is the reciprocal of the perplexity of the generated sequence with greedy decoding. • P(True) (Kadavath et al., 2022): After prompt-          

> Conf. Extraction ECE ↓MacroCE ↓
> Token Prob. 27.3 80.8 P(True) 41.3 70.3 Verbalized 42.7 106.3

Table 1: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of different confi-dence extraction methods in Table 2. Results are aver-aged over different prompting methods. Down arrows indicate the lower is the better. 

ing the model to generate the answer with “ Pos-sible answer: <model_answer> ”, it appends a suffix prompt asking “ Is the possible answer: (A) True (B) False ”, and then extracts the probability of answering “ A” as the confidence score. • Verbalized Confidence (Lin et al., 2022): Af-ter the model generates the answer, it further prompts the model to generate the confidence score by using suffix “ Confidence (0-1): ”2.To validate how applicable these methods are in our scenario, we first compare different confi-dence extraction methods to determine the ones to be used in the later experiments. We use the ECE and MacroCE metrics averaged over differ-ent prompting methods to measure the overall and instance-level performance (the lower, the better). The average is calculated over the 8 baseline meth-ods in Table 2. Table 1 shows that overall, Token Prob. achieves the best ECE scores. On the other hand, P(True) achieves the best MacroCE scores. The reason can be that, while P(True) consistently measures the probability of an option for a multiple-choice ques-tion, Token Prob. can be unstable when the gener-ated answer is long and includes auxiliary words (“English and Creole” vs. “Jamaican people speak English and Creole” in Figure 3). Verbalized Con-fidence shows the worst performance among the confidence extraction methods, indicating that fur-ther improvement is still required (e.g., tailor-made instructions shown in Tian et al. (2023)). There-fore, we exclude Verbalized Confidence extraction method in our following experiments, and for sim-plicity, we only report an aggregated overall per-formance of calibration by averaging the metrics obtained from using Token Prob. and P(True) 3.

> 2Slightly different from Lin et al. (2022), we further add the hint for the range of confidence score “(0-1)”.
> 3See Table 8 in the appendix for the full results. Since the confidence scores are on the same scale (0-1) and a specific calibration metric (e.g., ECE) essentially measures the same kinds of error regardless of the confidence extraction methods, reporting the average measures the overall performance.

8705 Prompting Method ECE ↓ MacroCE ↓                

> Standard 30.3 54.6
> Step Decomposition
> Knowledge 33.0 73.9 Knowledge+Explain 27.1 64.5 CoT 29.6 62.3 Self-Ask 26.4 66.6 Self-Ask (aggregate) 26.0 66.0
> Multi-Candidate Selection
> Self-Con. 34.7 67.6 Pseudo-ToT 33.0 73.5

Table 2: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of different prompting methods of different categories, as intro-duced in Section 2.2. The down arrow implies the lower, the better. The best-performing entry on each column is marked in bold .

2.4 Impact of Prompting Methods 

Table 2 shows the impact of prompting methods on confidence calibration. We observe: 

Step Decomposition helps improve the model’s overall expected confidence calibration (Knowl-edge+Explain, CoT, Self-Ask), as reflected by ECE in Table 2. The reason can be that, with the gen-erated chained thoughts or intermediate question-answer pairs in the context, the model-generated confidence is grounded onto the elicited thoughts. 

Multi-Candidate Selection may cast a negative effect on the confidence calibration (Self-Con., Pseudo-ToT). The reason can be that the candidate proposal stage adds to the randomness of the con-text. The final answers are sampled from and not necessarily aware of other candidates when gener-ated, but the confidence extraction methods are con-ditioned on all candidates. Such mismatch can lead to lower confidence calibration and suggests that specialized confidence extraction methods should be developed to improve their performance. Compared to the standard prompting, the ad-vanced prompting methods (e.g., CoT) seem to de-grade the instance-level calibration i.e., they can simultaneously achieve higher MacroCE but lower ECEs. Such mismatch suggests that instance-level extreme values have a negative impact on the confi-dence calibration. We then raise the question: what are the major causes of these high error extreme values: over-confidence (high confidence in wrong answers) or under-confidence (low confidence in correct answers)? We select the best-performing prompting methods to investigate further. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8  

> score
> Standard Knowledge CoT Self-Ask
> prompt
> Confidence Accuracy

Figure 4: Accuracy versus confidence scores. Higher confidence scores relative to accuracy mean that the model is generally over-confident. In the ideal calibra-tion case, there should be no gap between them. 

Over-Confidence Degrades Calibration We compare the averaged confidence scores (over all the samples) and accuracy in Figure 4. In the ideal case where we reach the perfect instance-level cali-bration (i.e., 100% confidence on all correct exam-ples and 0% confidence on all wrong examples), the averaged confidence scores shall be equal to the accuracy of the model on the data. We can observe that, compared to the standard prompting, all other prompting methods suffer even more from over-confidence. Similar to well-observed anchoring bias in human behavior (Tver-sky and Kahneman, 1974; Furnham and Boo, 2011; Lieder et al., 2018), the generated thoughts may also mislead the model to be over-certain of its own answer. For example, the generated thoughts such as from the steps we can conclude that can potentially make the model confident with its an-swers. If the output answer is wrong, the instance-level error from these high-confidence cases will be high. In the following section, we will investigate if treatment towards human anchoring bias can be extended to model confidence calibration. 

3 Fact-and-Reflection Prompting 

3.1 Motivation and Design 

There have been studies in cognitive science on how to mitigate the over-confidence caused by anchoring-bias (Block and Harper, 1991; George et al., 2000), and the ideas have also been recently introduced to AI research in the context of decision-making (Echterhoff et al., 2022). One key insight is: Providing multiple facts, instead of conducting reasoning directly with the first acquired fact, can help reduce the bias. We take inspiration from this finding and propose to improve confidence cal-8706 ibration by decomposing the fact-acquiring and reflective reasoning steps during prompting . We expect this framework to encourage the inclusion of multi-perspective facts in the context before reason-ing toward the answer. We denote it as Fact-and-

Reflection ( FaR ) prompting, which can be viewed as a new form of step decomposition prompting with constrained decomposition. Specifically, in FaR prompt context, we guide the models with facts, sources of facts, and re-flective reasoning conditioned on the facts be-fore extracting confidence. In the CoT-style prompting, the answer A is sampled from the 

p(A|Q, T, θ ) (Dohan et al., 2022), where Q de-notes the query, T denotes the thoughts generated by the model and θ denotes the model parameters. In FaR, we sequentially acquire two component thoughts Tf and Tr (i.e., fact and reflection steps in Figure 2) regarding the known facts and reflec-tive reasoning of the model about the questions. Motivated by Weller et al. (2023), we believe the trustworthiness of the sources can help stabilize the model reflection Tr. For model generated Tf, we add a sub-step to ask the model to elicit the known sources of the generated facts. Upon acquiring the component thoughts, The final answer A is sampled from p(A|Q, T f, T r, θ ),i.e., the model generates the answer with the final step prompt including thoughts at each step. We design FaR prompting to be orthogonal to confidence extraction so that it can work together with different confidence extraction methods. The results of the step questions and the final answer will be utilized in the prompt to extract confidence. In an ideal case, the model-generated “facts” should be verified by humans. However, human annotations are not always available and are hard to collect. To address this, we propose to prompt the models to generate relevant internal knowledge that may potentially help answer the questions as “facts”. We conduct a pioneering study on introduc-ing external verification in Section 3.3. 

3.2 Performance and Ablations 

We further study the generalized case with model-generated knowledge as Tf. We compare FaR and its different variants with the strongest baselines in Table 2 (i.e., entries with the lowest calibration er-rors measured in ECE and in MacroCE), which are Self-Ask (aggregate) and Standard, respectively. Table 3 shows that FaR prompting brings im-                   

> Prompting Method ECE ↓MacroCE ↓
> Standard 30.3 54.6 Self-Ask (aggregate) 26.0 66.0 FaR (fact-only,no-source) 26.4 72.3 FaR (fact-only) 29.5 70.5 FaR (no-source) 28.4 60.5 FaR (+ explain )27.4 71.7 FaR (final) 22.8 47.0
> Table 3: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of different ab-lations of FaR. Standard and Self-Ask (aggregate) are provided for reference. “ ↓” denotes that lower is better. The best performance of each column is in bold .

provements on both calibration metrics. 

We also include an extensive ablation study over the prompt components of FaR: fact-only denotes the variant that we do not conduct the reflection step; no-source is where we remove source gen-eration (i.e., no “what are the sources...” step in Figure 2); +explain changes the final prompt from “Answer:” to “Explain and Answer:”, which is mo-tivated by Knowledge+Explain . From the table, we can observe that, although all variants achieve lower ECE than Standard Prompting, our final de-sign (denoted as FaR (final) ) achieves the best per-formance among them. On the other hand, for MacroCE, most variants get lower performance than the standard prompting. Therefore, all the components in FaR are important in achieving good performance in both metrics. 

3.3 What Impacted the Calibration? 

The performance with ECE and MacroCE in Ta-ble 2 and 3 together presents that FaR does mitigate the over-confidence issue analyzed in Section 2.4, with both the correct and wrong predictions consid-ered in the design of MacroCE. We now analyze how FaR prompting shifts the confidence distribution of the LLM generation. We compare it with CoT, as it is one of the best-performing models in the Step Decomposition cate-gory (Table 2). In addition, FaR can be regarded as a specially structured step decomposition prompt-ing that explicitly disentangles the steps of knowl-edge self-prompting and reflective reasoning. Figure 5 presents the specific distribution of con-fidence scores extracted by Token Prob., P(True), and Verbalized, respectively, smoothed by Kernel Density Estimation. We can observe that FaR miti-gates the overconfidence issue that we aspire to 8707 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                          

> Token Prob.
> 050 100 150 200
> Count Prompting Method
> CoT 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Token Prob. Prompting Method
> FaR 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> P(True)
> 050 100 150 200
> Count Prompting Method
> CoT 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> P(True) Prompting Method
> FaR 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Verbalized.
> 050 100 150 200
> Count Prompting Method
> CoT 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Verbalized. Prompting Method
> FaR

Figure 5: Distribution of the confidence scores ( Token Prob., P(True), Verbalized , in the top, middle, bottom, respectively), with different prompting styles, CoT (left) and FaR (right). Kernel Density Estimation (curved lines) is used to show smoothed distributions. FaR prompting helps lower the distribution mass on the high confidence side for different confidence extraction methods. 

resolve for different confidence extraction methods — it damps down the peak values and moves the den-sity mass to the left side (lower confidence). That said, it still suffers from overconfidence. Such be-havior partially explains the better confidence cal-ibration results we observed in Section 2.4. Even the density mass of the verbalized confidence is much balanced with FaR prompting, which greatly enhances the usability of such a method for black-box language models that have no access to the output token probabilities. Again, consistent with our findings in Section 2.4, various confidence ex-traction methods still suffer from over-confidence 

issue, i.e., the confidence scores are higher than the target model performance, especially Verbalized Confidence. With Verbalized Confidence, even though FaR helps reduce over-confidence, further effort shall be made in future work to make it better calibrated. 

Expressing Concern. How is FaR mitigating overconfidence? As shown in Table 4, qualita-tively, we observe an interesting phenomenon of the model outputs, named Expressing Concern .With FaR prompting, besides outputting the an-swer, the model further specifies its thoughts on the answers, including (i) if the current evidence provided in the context is enough to answer the question; (ii) if a specific condition should be given 

Question (Label) Model Output Would Persephone be a good consultant to a land-scape architect? (True) False. There will need to be further research. Would an owl monkey en-joy a strawberry? (True) It is not possible to answer with current evidence this question. Does Post Malone have a fear of needles? (False) False, but there is not yet suffi-cient evidence to answer. Should a Celiac sufferer avoid spaghetti? (True) False (It depends on the ingre-dients of the spaghetti) 

Table 4: Examples of the model expressing concerns. In addition to the output answer, the model also specifies whether the knowledge is sufficient or whether further conditions are needed to make the prediction. See Ta-ble 9 for detailed outputs for other steps, e.g., diverse model-generated sources. 

to answer the question. Comparing the probability of the model express-ing concern using different prompts, FaR prompt-ing can inspire the model to express concerns, com-pared to using the original CoT prompting (in 8.8% vs 3.9% examples). If we further remove the con-straint on choosing one answer in the instruction, the model will elaborate further comments besides giving the answers (e.g., “False. there is not yet suf-ficient evidence”) in 59.2% cases with FaR prompt-ing (denoted as FaR(free)). These complex an-8708 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 

> score
> no yes
> express_concern
> Token Prob. Accuracy

Figure 6: The confidence (extracted via token probabil-ity) and the accuracy when the model expresses (Lower) and does not express (Upper) concerns. With FaR (free) prompting, LLMs are more inclined to express concerns when the confidence and accuracy are low. 

swers are harder for performance computation than simple short answers, but give a clear picture for reviewing the model comments on the given ques-tions. For example, as shown in Table 4, the model correctly answers that Post Malone does not have a fear of needles 4, but it still expresses concerns about insufficient evidence. Upon the concerns, users can choose to find further evidence not in the model training data to help verify the guess (e.g., some video interviews). Yet the definition of “good” concerns requires future investigation. Notably, as shown in Figure 6, the expressing of concerns in the output typically co-occurs with lower confidence scores, which in turn co-occurs with lower accuracy on the questions. This implies that the model exhibits better confidence calibra-tion — with FaR prompting, the model tends to express concern on hard examples . As a result, it can further act as a kind of AI feedback (Bai et al., 2022) for self-improvement by identifying difficult instances. For example, such a signal can trigger an iterative application of retrieval augmentation for checking and correcting the facts and sources provided by the models (Chen et al., 2021). When extracting the statistics in Figure 6 from FaR(final) and CoT, on examples that the model expresses concerns, the accuracy is 25% (FaR) vs. 60.2% (CoT); on examples that models do not ex-press concerns, the accuracy is 67.0% (FaR) vs. 69.9% (CoT). That is, FaR identifies examples with lower overall accuracy than CoT when concerns are expressed. 

Addressing hard examples. We further simu-late the scenario of detecting hard examples that are not answerable with LLM’s internal knowledge                 

> 4The model supports its educated guess with Post Malone’s numerous tattoos in the fact step. See Table 9 for details of fact and reflection steps of this and other examples. Prompting Method ECE ↓MacroCE ↓
> Vicuna-13b
> Standard 19.4 35.5 FaR 11.1 33.9
> Baichuan-2-13b
> Standard 17.1 64.3 FaR 10.1 48.4
> Llama-2-13b
> Standard 19.3 71.9 FaR 15.4 54.2

Table 5: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of different prompting methods and different backbone large lan-guage models. The down arrow implies the lower, the better. The best-performing entry on each column is marked in bold .

and then using external knowledge as augmenta-tion. We only sample and apply retrieval augmen-tation to the examples where the model expresses concerns. The treatment is done by adding corre-sponding external knowledge to the hard examples in the context, with the same setting and external knowledge from Zhao et al. (2023) 5.We compare this sampling strategy with ran-domly sampling the same portion of examples (i.e., control) and check the performance gain. With FaR(final) as the prompting method, we can ob-serve a 68.0% performance improvement in accu-racy through external augmentation on hard exam-ples that the model expresses concerns about. In contrast, randomly sampling the same portion of ex-amples and applying augmentation only achieved a 15.0% performance improvement in accuracy, implying that FaR(final) identifies the instances de-manding the external knowledge more accurately by checking if the model expresses concerns .

3.4 Generalizing to other language models 

In this section, we generalize our experiments beyond GPT-3 to test the robustness of FaR across other language models. We follow the previous settings and conduct experiments on StrategyQA, with Token Prob. as the confidence extraction method. We extend our experiments with Vi-cuna ( Vicuna-13b-v1.3 , Zheng et al., 2023), Baichuan (Baichuan2-13B-Chat , Baichuan, 2023), LLama 2 ( Llama-2-13b-chat-hf , Tou-vron et al., 2023). Our inference structure is built 

> 5Further analysis on this setting incorporating external knowledge is in the appendix (Section A.4) .

8709 with vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023). From Table 5, we can observe that, compared to Standard Prompting, FaR consistently leads to reduced calibration errors, measured by either ECE or MacroCE, which suggests the generalizability of FaR towards open-source language models. 

4 Related Work 

Prompting Large Language Models. Recent re-search (Brown et al., 2020; Kojima et al., 2023) on large language models shows that in-context learning (ICL) achieves great effectiveness in using models as few-shot or zero-shot reasoners. Differ-ent styles of prompting such as Knowledge prompt-ing (Liu et al., 2022), Chain of Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022b), Self-Consistency prompting (Wang et al., 2023), Self-ask (Press et al., 2023), Tree-of-Thought prompting (Yao et al., 2023), and Skill-in-Context (Chen et al., 2023) are then proposed to guide the model to elicit its knowledge for reasoning in different ways. Most previous work mainly focuses on how such a prompting method influences the model perfor-mance on various tasks. In this paper, we compare how confidence calibration is influenced by differ-ent prompting methods. 

Confidence Calibration of LLMs. Extracting honest and constructive confidence scores of large language models is considered an important step towards building faithful and trustworthy AI sys-tems (Desai and Durrett, 2020; Si et al., 2023). Many methods have been proposed recently to get reliable confidence scores with different suffix prompts added after outputting possible answers, such as a follow of True or False multiple choice question (Kadavath et al., 2022), asking models to describe the likelihood of the answer (Lin et al., 2022), and describing the likelihood that the an-swer is correct with demonstrations (Tian et al., 2023). However, it remains unclear how robust the methods are and how good they are comparatively. Our paper proposes FaR prompting as an orthog-onal method to improve calibration and compare different extraction methods with our test bed. Recently, Yang et al. (2023) discuss the honesty problem of models as part of the alignment. Qian et al. (2023) study the confidence change when there is a conflict between in-context and model internal knowledge. Another line of work links model confidence with human confidence (Zhou et al., 2023; Steyvers et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024). In our paper, we refer to the model trustworthiness based on confidence calibration. 

5 Conclusion and Discussion 

We closely examined how different prompting methods influence confidence calibration and found that over-confidence may lead to bad instance-level calibration. To address that, we propose FaR prompting, which decomposes the fact elicitation and reflective reasoning steps, and shows that it provides a good way to calibrate the model perfor-mance across different metrics. Our further analy-sis reveals that the reasons behind the performance can be that FaR prompting elicits the model to gen-erate more honest answers, via expressing concerns 

in lower confidence situations. We encourage the designers of future prompting methods to evaluate their influence on the confi-dence calibration in addition to the performance. Meanwhile, we further suggest that future confi-dence extraction methods should take into account their robustness to different prompting methods. 

Limitations 

Extension to Human Instruction Datasets. So far, we have conducted our experiments on question-answering datasets and shown the effec-tiveness of current prompting methods, confidence extraction methods, and our FaR prompting. Our method may be examined on the human instruction datasets as well, such as the Human Eval dataset (Wang et al., 2022). However, since the targeted answers are in free form (e.g., ranging from de-signing a personal profile to writing a program for quick sort), it may require very different evaluation metrics beyond simple accuracy, which calls for further study and is thus beyond the scope of this paper. Multi-perspective evaluation of the output can be necessary, such as the annotations provided in (Malaviya et al., 2023). We consider such exten-sion to be an important future work. 

Inner Model Dynamics. The confidence extrac-tion methods compared in this paper are mainly based on signals from the model’s logits or final sampled tokens. It remains unclear how prompt-ing methods will influence the model uncertainty estimated from inner model dynamics, e.g., the tree structure-ness of a sentence inside transform-ers (Murty et al., 2023). We still study the LLM model as a black box and do not closely examine how the model’s internal working mechanisms are 8710 influenced by the FaR prompting. One future direc-tion is to study the confidence calibration problem by using mechanistic interpretation (Olsson et al., 2022). We will leave such internal interpretability work as a future work. 

Model Elicited Sources. In this paper, we explore how model-generated knowledge sources help im-prove model confidence calibration. In the Ap-pendix, we present the detailed outputs for all steps of FaR, such as diverse model-generated sources that include but are not limited to URLs, in Ta-ble 9. For example, in the last row of Table 9, the model elicits the sources as the Mayo Clinic and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) . The model then autonomously comments on whether these sources are reputable, which plays the role of verbal confi-dence extraction on generated facts. However, Gao et al. (2023) directly generating sources based on facts may lead to inaccurate sources. Exploring the relation between the source’s factualness and confidence calibration can be an important future direction. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our datasets are written by professional annota-tors or extracted from Wikipedia for the purpose of scientific research on question-answering systems. However, we observe no model outputs that use ex-tremely sensational language or inappropriate and aggressive language. The questions and outputs collected are all in English, which can limit the generalizability of the performance of our pipeline. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is initiated during Xinran’s internship at Tecent AI Lab, Bellevue. Xinran is supported by the ONR Award N000142312840. The authors thank Zhengxuan Wu, Xuanyu Zhou, Ruixin Hong, Vijay Viswanathan, Chenyang Yang, and Christina Ma for their insightful feedback and anonymous reviewers for helpful discussions and comments. 

References 

Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin John-son, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark, Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gau-rav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Gar-cia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hur-witz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagiel-ski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Ben-jamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nys-trom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Au-rko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wiet-ing, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. 2023. Palm 2 technical report. Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Christo-pher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott John-ston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bow-man, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. Baichuan. 2023. Baichuan 2: Open large-scale lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10305 .Richard A Block and David R Harper. 1991. Over-confidence in estimation: Testing the anchoring-and-adjustment hypothesis. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 49(2):188–207. Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston. 2014. Question answering with subgraph embeddings. 8711 Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901. Jiaao Chen, Xiaoman Pan, Dian Yu, Kaiqiang Song, Xi-aoyang Wang, Dong Yu, and Jianshu Chen. 2023. Skills-in-context prompting: Unlocking composi-tionality in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00304 .Sihao Chen, Fan Zhang, Kazoo Sone, and Dan Roth. 2021. Improving faithfulness in abstractive sum-marization with contrast candidate generation and selection. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , pages 5935–5941, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 .Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Bar-ret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 .Shrey Desai and Greg Durrett. 2020. Calibration of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP) , pages 295–302, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Ja-cob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A. Saurous, Jascha Narain Sohl-Dickstein, Kevin Murphy, and Charles Sutton. 2022. Language model cascades. 

ArXiv , abs/2207.10342. Jessica Maria Echterhoff, Matin Yarmand, and Julian McAuley. 2022. Ai-moderated decision-making: Capturing and balancing anchoring bias in sequen-tial decision tasks. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , CHI ’22, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Adrian Furnham and Hua Chu Boo. 2011. A literature review of the anchoring effect. The Journal of Socio-Economics , 40(1):35–42. Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to generate text with citations. Joey F George, Kevin Duffy, and Manju Ahuja. 2000. Countering the anchoring and adjustment bias with decision support systems. Decision Support Systems ,29(2):195–206. Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Did Aristo-tle Use a Laptop? A Question Answering Bench-mark with Implicit Reasoning Strategies. Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (TACL) .Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Wein-berger. 2017. On calibration of modern neural net-works. Dave Hulbert. 2023. Tree of knowledge: Tok aka tree of knowledge dataset for large lan-guage models llm. https://github.com/dave1010/ tree-of-thought-prompting .Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk, Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Ka-mal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Language models (mostly) know what they know. Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2023. Large lan-guage models are zero-shot reasoners. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Effi-cient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .Falk Lieder, Thomas L Griffiths, Quentin J M. Huys, and Noah D Goodman. 2018. The anchoring bias reflects rational use of cognitive resources. Psycho-nomic bulletin & review , 25:322–349. Stephanie C. Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in words. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2022. Jiacheng Liu, Alisa Liu, Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Pe-ter West, Ronan Le Bras, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2022. Generated knowledge prompting for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3154–3169, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. 8712 Chaitanya Malaviya, Subin Lee, Sihao Chen, Elizabeth Sieber, Mark Yatskar, and Dan Roth. 2023. Expertqa: Expert-curated questions and attributed answers. In 

arXiv .Shikhar Murty, Pratyusha Sharma, Jacob Andreas, and Christopher D. Manning. 2023. Characterizing in-trinsic compositionality in transformers with tree pro-jections. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Con-erly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jack-son Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. 2022. In-context learning and induction heads. Transformer Circuits Thread . Https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html. OpenAI. 2022. Chatgpt. OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27730–27744. Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. Cheng Qian, Xinran Zhao, and Sherry Tongshuang Wu. 2023. "merge conflicts!" exploring the impacts of external distractors to parametric knowledge graphs. Chenglei Si, Zhe Gan, Zhengyuan Yang, Shuohang Wang, Jianfeng Wang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Li-juan Wang. 2023. Prompting gpt-3 to be reliable. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) .Chenglei Si, Chen Zhao, Sewon Min, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2022. Re-examining calibration: The case of question answering. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 ,pages 2814–2829, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mark Steyvers, Heliodoro Tejeda Lemus, Aakriti Ku-mar, Catarina Belem, Sheer Karny, Xinyue Hu, Lukas Mayer, and Padhraic Smyth. 2024. The calibration gap between model and human confidence in large language models. ArXiv , abs/2401.13835. Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Pranesh Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny So-raker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Ale-jandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Co-hen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed Chi, and Quoc Le. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog appli-cations. Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D. Manning. 2023. Just ask for cali-bration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. ArXiv , abs/2305.14975. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science ,185(4157):1124–1131. Neeraj Varshney, Wenlin Yao, Hongming Zhang, Jian-shu Chen, and Dong Yu. 2023. A stitch in time saves nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03987 .Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2022. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions. Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022a. Emer-gent abilities of large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certifica-tion. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, 8713 et al. 2022b. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits rea-soning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Orion Weller, Marc Marone, Nathaniel Weir, Dawn Lawrie, Daniel Khashabi, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2023. " according to..." prompting language mod-els improves quoting from pre-training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13252 .Yuqing Yang, Ethan Chern, Xipeng Qiu, Graham Neu-big, and Pengfei Liu. 2023. Alignment for honesty. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Xinran Zhao, Hongming Zhang, Xiaoman Pan, Wen-lin Yao, Dong Yu, and Jianshu Chen. 2023. Thrust: Adaptively propels large language models with exter-nal knowledge. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Kaitlyn Zhou, Jena D. Hwang, Xiang Ren, and Maarten Sap. 2024. Relying on the unreliable: The impact of language models’ reluctance to express uncertainty. 

ArXiv , abs/2401.06730. Kaitlyn Zhou, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023. Navigating the grey area: How expressions of uncertainty and overconfidence affect language models. 8714 A Appendix 

A.1 Examples of Baseline Prompting Methods 

In Section 2.2, we provide a detailed description of all the baseline prompting methods. Here we further illustrate their working mechanisms in Fig-ure 7. It shows how these methods are categorized into two major classes — Step Decomposition and Multi-Candidate Selection — based on the number of answer candidates are provided during the infer-ence stage. All the baseline methods are evaluated on the original splits of StrategyQA (dev, 229 ex-amples) and Web Questions (test, 100 examples), respectively. The data points we evaluated will be released upon acceptance. 

A.2 Details about Over-confidence or Under-confidence 

As we discussed earlier, most of the prompting methods generally suffer from over-confidence. We now include some additional results to further show that this is true across different confidence extrac-tion methods. In Figure 8, we show the average confidence scores and the accuracies of different prompting methods, where the confidence score for each method is obtained by averaging the confidence scores of all samples. From Figure 8, we can ob-serve that our conclusion on over-confidence ex-ists generally across different confidence extraction methods and prompting methods. We can also iden-tify that Verbalized Confidence suffers most from the over-confidence issue. 

A.3 Impact of Confidence Extraction Methods with Additional Metrics                 

> Conf. Extrac-tion Methods ECE-avg ↓
> ECE-wins ↑
> MacroCE-avg ↓
> MacroCE-wins ↑
> Token Prob. 23.5 878.4 4P(True) 37.2 165.4 5Verbalized 40.6 0101.9 0
> Table 6: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of different con-fidence extraction methods. Results are averaged over different prompting methods. Up (Down) arrows indi-cate the higher (lower) is the better.

In Section 2.3, we compare different confidence extraction methods using the ECE and MacroCE (i.e., ECE-avg and MacroCE-avg) averaged over different prompting methods to measure the over-all and instance-level performance (the lower, the      

> Prompting Method ECE ↓
> Standard 25.5 FaR (human fact-only) 14.8 FaR (human fact + reflection) 13.6
> Table 7: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) of using human-annotated facts in FaR, denoted by FaR (human). We use token probability as the confidence extraction method. The down arrow denotes that a lower score implies better calibration performance.

better). To ensure that extreme values do not in-fluence the conclusion, we further report the addi-tional metric of ECE/MacroCE-wins in Table 6. If a confidence extraction method achieves the low-est ECE/MacroCE-based errors with respect to a prompting method, it is marked as a win. All the scores are the average of 8 baseline methods in Table 2 together with FaR (final). From Table 6, we observe that Token Prob. achieves the best ECE for both the averaged scores and wins. In contrast, P(True) achieves the best MacroCE for both the averaged scores and wins, though the margin is not large. Therefore, the con-clusion based on this new metric is consistent with the earlier findings. 

A.4 FaR with Human-Annotated External Knowledge 

To further verify the idea that providing facts helps with confidence calibration, we incorporate multi-ple human-annotated facts (i.e., Tf ) that are rel-evant to each question ( Q) on the StrategyQA task (Geva et al., 2021). The benchmark in this ex-periment is not the mix of StrategyQA and WebQ since human-annotated supporting facts are only provided in StrategyQA. For example, for the ques-tion “Did Aristotle use a laptop”, one piece of the fact can be “The first laptop was invented in 1980”. Note that we assume the human-annotated facts are accurate, and therefore omit the step of gener-ating the source. Incorporating human-annotated facts isolates the imperfection that may arise from model-generated facts and sources, which serves as a controlled ablation for examining the help-fulness of facts. As shown in Table 7, including human-annotated facts in the context can improve the confidence calibration significantly. Furthermore, with the reflection step linking the facts and the final answer, the calibration can be further improved. However, human annotations are not always available and are hard to collect. To 8715 Question:  what  does  Jamaican  people  speak?                                                                                            

> Answer: English and Creole
> Question: what does Jamaican people speak?
> Generate some related knowledge:
> Jamaican people typically …
> Answer: English and Creole
> Question: what does Jamaican people speak?
> Let’s think step by step:
> Step 1: Jamaican people speak …
> Question: what does Jamaican people speak?
> Answer: English and Creole
> Question: what does Jamaican people speak?
> Are follow-up Questions needed? Yes
> Follow-up Questions and Answers:
> Q1. In daily life …A1. People …
> Question: what does Jamaican people speak?
> Imagine three different experts discussing
> the question:
> Expert 1: Jamaican people usually …
> Standard Prompting Knowledge Prompting
> CoT
> Self-consistency
> Self-ask Pseudo-ToT
> Step Decomposition Prompting Multi-Candidate Selection Prompting
> Answer: English and Creole
> Answer: English and Creole
> Answer: English and Creole

Figure 7: Different existing prompting methods to be analyzed. Each rounded rectangle represents one round of prompting. The intermediate answers will then be utilized in the final prompt to extract the answer to the original question. Highlighted text denotes the sentences provided to the model as the prompt. The loop icon in 

self-consistency prompting denotes re-sampling with the same prompt multiple times. token_prob acc ptrue verbalized 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0       

> score
> 0.84 0.66 0.44 0.97
> prompt = Standard
> token_prob acc ptrue verbalized
> 0.81 0.68 0.72 0.96
> prompt = Knowledge
> token_prob acc ptrue verbalized
> score_type
> 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> score
> 0.92 0.67 0.84 0.96
> prompt = CoT
> token_prob acc ptrue verbalized
> score_type
> 0.69 0.62 0.71 0.94
> prompt = Self-Ask

Figure 8: Accuracy and averaged confidence scores of different confidence extraction methods and prompting methods. In an ideal case with perfect calibration, the gap between these two scores should be zero. 

address this, our proposed FaR prompting elicits the models to generate relevant internal knowledge and sources that serve as the proxy for such golden human-annotated facts. 

A.5 Influence of Final-step Prompt Length 

We identify the final prompt length as another con-founder in our experiments: although different prompting styles are initialized with the same max length to output the thoughts, the thoughts injected in the final prompt asking for answers to the origi-nal questions may still have varied length. 0 200 400 600 800 1000 

> Prompt Length
> 10 15 20 25 30
> ece_perp Dataset SQA WQ Prompt CoT FaR

Figure 9: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) of CoT and FaR prompting with varying final prompt lengths on StrategyQA (SQA) and WQ. 

To remove the potential influence of actual prompt length, we further compare CoT and FaR with varying prompt lengths of the final step, ask-ing the model for the answers. Figure 9 presents the change of the ECE with respect to varying final-step prompt length. The table shows that FaR (dash lines) consistently outperforms CoT (solid lines) on different datasets and lengths. We can also observe that longer prompt length does not always lead to lower error, further validating our experimental results in Section 2.4 by removing the potential confounder: final prompt length. 

A.6 Influence of the Number of Demonstrations 

We identify the number of demonstrations in the prompt context as another important factor influ-encing the model calibration. 8716 Method Accuracy ECE-Token. ECE-P(True) MacroCE-Token. MacroCE-P(True) Standard 60.3 25.5 35.1 67.8 41.5 Knowledge 69.9 27.8 38.1 78.9 68.9 Knowledge+Explain 65.1 18.9 35.4 52.2 76.8 CoT 67.2 25.0 34.3 82.6 42.0 Self-Ask 60.7 17.6 35.3 58.5 74.7 Self-Ask (aggregate) 60.4 17.0 35.0 60.0 72.0 Self-Con. 63.3 35.9 33.5 97.9 37.2           

> Pseudo-ToT 58.5 23.4 42.7 68.0 78.9 FaR(final) 64.0 13.9 31.6 52.9 41.0

Table 8: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of different prompting methods. The down arrow denotes the lower, the better. The best performance of each column is in bold . Token. and P(True) denote the use of Token Prob. and P(True) as the confidence extraction methods, respectively. 20 40 60 80       

> score
> Measure = ECE
> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> num_demo
> 20 40 60 80
> score
> Measure = MacroCE

Figure 10: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Macro-average Calibration Error (MacroCE) of stan-dard prompting with a varying number of demonstra-tions with Standard Prompting. 

Figure 10 presents the change of the ECE and MacroCE with respect to the changing number of demonstrations with standard prompting. From the figure we can observe that: increasing the number of demonstrations helps reduce the error measured by ECE but not the error measured by MacroCE. The reason can be that similar to the influence of the number of demonstrations on performance, demonstrations help the models do well on the questions that are answerable and show good con-sistency and robustness on these questions. The overall calibration is also improved with more ro-bust answers. However, for extremely hard cases where the model can not solve at all, increasing the number of demonstrations can not help solve the task, but may still lead to increased confi-dence, hence the instance-level calibration is not improved. 

A.7 Full Results of ECE and MacroCE of different prompting methods 

In the main paper, we analyze the influence of prompting methods on confidence calibration from different perspectives, where for simplicity the re-sults are presented by aggregating over different dimensions (e.g., averaging the metrics over differ-ent confidence extraction methods, or over different baselines). For completeness and for future refer-ence, we report the full results of different prompt-ing strategies (including our FaR) under different confidence extraction methods in Table 8, where we report both ECE and MacroCE. In terms of confidence calibration, Table 8 shows that FaR (final) performs the best or the second best in all settings. On the other hand, in terms of model performance in accuracy, we also observe that FaR (final) outperforms 5 out of 8 baselines, but is slightly worse when compared to CoT or Knowledge-based prompting. The reason can be that (i) further constraints are applied to the model-generated thoughts and limit the degree of freedom in search; (ii) the model tends to provide conserva-tive answers. The slight loss in accuracy may be viewed as a kind of “calibration tax” for achiev-ing better calibration. Nevertheless, as discussed in Section 3.3, the conservative answers with ex-pressed concerns can trigger and guide external knowledge augmentation on the (hard) examples with significant performance gain. 8717 Question (Label) Facts Sources Reflection Output Would Persephone be a good consul-tant to a landscape architect? (True) 1. Goddess of Spring and Vegetation: Perse-phone is often... 2. Queen of the under-world... 1. Homer’s Hymn to Demeter: this ancient text... 2.Ovid’s Meta-morphoses: this col-lection of narratives... 1. Connection to Veg-etation and Renewal: Persephone’s role... 2. Cultural and Histori-cal Influence:... False. There will need to be further re-search. Would an owl mon-key enjoy a straw-berry? (True) 1. Diet of Owl Mon-keys: Owal monkeys primarily have a diet... 2. Taste Preferences of Primates... 1. Scientific journals and articles on pri-matology... (pubmed. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) 2. Zoological Associa-tion websites... 1. Sweet Taste Pref-erence in Primates... 2. Digestive Capabil-ities... It is not possible to answer with current evidence this ques-tion. Does Post Malone have a fear of nee-dles? (False) 1. Tattoo Collection: he has a significant number of tattoos... 2. Public Statements:... 1. Interviews and Pro-files: publications like Rolling Stone, Bill-board, GQ... 2. Social Media: his accounts on platforms... 1. Nature of Tattoos: tattoos are created by repeatedly inserting a needle... 2. Lack of Public Statements re-garding a fear of nee-dles:... False, but there is not yet sufficient ev-idence to answer. Should a Celiac sufferer avoid spaghetti? (True) 1. Definition of Celiac Disease: Celiac dis-ease is an autoim-mune... 2. Gluten in Wheat and Gluten-free Alternatives:... The recommendation on avoiding traditional spaghetti is supported by reputable sources like Mayo Clinic and NIDDK... 1. Nature of Celiac Disease:... Health Im-plications of Gluten Consumption: contin-uous consumption of gluten... False (It depends on the ingredients of the spaghetti) 

Table 9: Examples of the model output on the fact, reflection, and answer steps of FaR prompting. Detailed explanations on each point from the model are omitted for the presentation purpose. 

A.8 Full Examples of FaR Prompting 

In Figure 2 and Table 4, we demonstrate the gen-eral ideas about how FaR prompting works and how the model answers questions while expressing necessary concerns. Recall that FaR sequentially prompts the LLM for (i) facts, (ii) sources; (iii) reflection, and (iv) answers. In Table 9, we further provide the outputs at each of these steps for the examples in Table 4. We can observe that the out-put concern is relevant to the facts elicited in the context. For example, for the question, Should a Celiac sufferer avoid spaghetti? , the model says it depends on the ingredients , which relates to Gluten-free alternatives for spaghetti that is discussed in the fact step output of the model. 8718