Title: 2025.emnlp-main.1205.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.1205.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 03 Jan 2026 16:57:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 23609–23626 November 4-9, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

## DNDS CORE : Decontextualization and Decomposition for Factuality Verification in Long-Form Text Generation 

Miriam Wanner, Benjamin Van Durme, Mark Dredze 

Johns Hopkins University 

{mwanner5,vandurme,mdredze}@jhu.edu 

Abstract 

The decompose-then-verify strategy for verifi-cation of Large Language Model (LLM) gen-erations decomposes claims that are then inde-pendently verified. Decontextualization aug-ments text (claims) to ensure it can be verified outside of the original context, enabling reli-able verification. While decomposition and de-contextualization have been explored indepen-dently, their interactions in a complete system have not been investigated. Their conflicting purposes can create tensions: decomposition isolates atomic facts while decontextualization inserts relevant information. Furthermore, a decontextualized subclaim presents a challenge to the verification step: what part of the aug-mented text should be verified as it now con-tains multiple atomic facts? We conduct an evaluation of different decomposition, decon-textualization, and verification strategies and find that the choice of strategy matters in the resulting factuality scores. Additionally, we introduce D NDS CORE , a decontextualization aware verification method that validates sub-claims in the context of contextual information. 

1 Introduction 

Factuality evaluations measure the correctness of language model generations. Recent measures of factual precision utilize a decompose-then-verify framework, where text is first decomposed into atomic subclaims and then validated against a trusted source document (Min et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024). However, decomposition may remove information necessary to understand the claim. For example, in Figure 1, the decomposition of the sen-tence “He was one of the most influential directors in 1930s cinema.” would include the subclaim “He was a director.”, which lacks entity context (who does “He” refers to?). These ambiguities prevent successful claim verification, and could lead to false positives. Decontextualization is the process of augment-ing subclaims with necessary context to an ensure an accurate claim verification independent of the rest of the generation. Decontextualization can include pronoun replacement, name completion, or addition of information from the original text (Choi et al., 2021). Decontextualizing decomposed atomic subclaims provides necessary information, but introduces several other problems. By intro-ducing new information to the subclaim, the claim becomes less atomic, making it unclear which part of the new claim requires verification. For example, in Figure 1, decontextualizing “He was a director.” results in “Quentin Tarantino was an influential 1930s director”. As a result, the verification task changes from validating whether Tarantino was a directer, to validating whether he was a 1930s di-rector. In addition, the potential incorrectness of information added at the decontextualization step can mask the correctness of the original subclaim. Finally, by decontextualizing a set of decomposed claims, we are at risk of building a set of redundant claims that closely resemble the original claim (as shown in top right set of claims in Figure 1). Decon-textualization alone still may not solve the original problem, where the subclaim does not stand alone from the original context and therefore cannot be verified. Issues with factuality evaluation persist even if we flip the verification pipeline from decompose-then-decontextualize to decontextualize-then-decompose, where the original claim is first decontextualized, then decomposed, and finally verified. This approach may result in verifying repeated context across claims, inflating the resulting factuality score. For example in the bottom right of Figure 1, the subclaim “Quentin Tarantino is an American filmmaker.” is generated for both Sentence 3 and Sentence 4. Additionally, decomposing the decontextualized claim results in a loss of context for every subclaim added in 

23609 DnDScore  Sentence 3                                                   

> -Quentin Tarantino is an American filmmaker. ✔
> -
> -
> -
> Factscore
> Quentin Tarantino is an American filmmaker known for his unique storytelling style and bold, creative movies. Born on March 27, 1902, in Knoxville, Tennessee, he developed a love for movies at an early age. Tarantino has directed iconic films like Pulp Fiction and Kill Bill , known for their sharp dialogue and intense action. He was one of the most
> influential directors in 1930s cinema.
> -He was a director. ✔
> -He worked in 1930s cinema. ✘
> -He was highly influential in the field of directing. ✔
> Quentin Tarantino, an American filmmake r, was one of the most influential directors in 1930s cinema.
> -Quentin Tarantino was an influential
> 1930s director. ✘
> -Quentin Tarantino worked in 1930s
> cinema as an influential director .✘
> -Quentin Tarantino was highly influential in the field of directing in the 1930s .✘
> Sentence 4
> -Quentin Tarantino is an American filmmaker. ✔
> - Quentin Tarantino was an influential director. ✔
> - Quentin Tarantino worked in 1930s cinema. ✘
> - Quentin Tarantino was highly influential in the field of directing. ✔
> Decomposition Decontext-
> ualization
> Decontextualization
> Decomposition
> Redundant Subclaims
> masks correctness of
> original claim
> Co-reference Ambiguity ("He")
> Repeated Essential Context
> inflates factuality score
> Subclaim Decontextualized
> - He was a director. ✔-Quentin Tarantino was an influential 1930s director.
> - He worked in 1930s -Quentin Tarantino worked in 1930s cinema as an
> cinema. ✘influential director.
> - He was highly influential in -Quentin Tarantino was highly influential in the field
> the field of directing. ✔of directing in the 1930s.
> Decomposition + Decontextualization

Figure 1: Current claim verification methods evaluate subclaims out of context, but adding this context into the claim verification pipeline is not trivial. We introduce D NDS CORE , a method that evaluates subclaims given the decontextualized claim or another context to help verify. 

the decontextualization step. If there was another person named Quentin Tarantino, we would need additional information to disambiguate which Quentin Tarantino was being discussed. Current research has validated the decomposition (Wanner et al., 2024) and decontextualization (Gunjal and Durrett, 2024) processes independently, but have not considered these interactions. We evaluate three methods for performing both decomposition and decontextualization in the same system. First, we consider decomposition then de-contextualization, which enables us to first isolate the atomic subclaims and then add the relevant con-text. We next consider decontextualization then decomposition, where we ensure claims have nec-essary context before decomposing them into sub-claims. Finally, we propose a new joint method, DnD, which jointly performs decomposition and decontextualization. Since the resulting decontextualized claim is no longer atomic, it presents an inherent ambiguity to the verified: which portion of the claim is being validated? We propose a new verification method DNDS CORE (Decomposition and Decontextualiza-tion Score) that considers both an atomic subclaim and its decontextualized form for verification, in-dicating the specific claim to verify and its rele-vant context. We find that using our new contex-tualized fact verification method changes if claims are verified, highlighting problems with current decompose-then-verify scores. We also show exam-ples and common settings where D NDS CORE and decompose-then-verify methods differ, and where claims are easier or more difficult to verify. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Decomposition 

There are several systems that implement the decompose-then-verify framework, varying in de-composition and verification strategy. Min et al. (2023) introduce FA CT SCORE , which utilizes a LLM-prompted decomposition step for claim ver-ification. Jing et al. (2023) use a similar pipeline, but introduce F AITH SCORE , a variation for evalu-ating the output of vision-language models. Song et al. (2024) introduce a new flavor of FA CT SCORE ,called V ERI SCORE , which extracts and verifies only claims which are verifiable. They include a contextualized method with a sliding window for verifiable claim extraction, but do not use context in the verification step. Several studies have tried alternate strategies to factuality scoring. Kamoi et al. (2023) introduce a new textual entailment dataset, W ICE, and use an automatic LLM Claim-Split approach, separating claims into sub-sentence units used for entailment classification. Using both the dataset and decompo-sition strategy, they tackle verification and retrieval. Chen et al. (2024) generate yes/no questions align-ing to specific aspects of a claim for claim veri-fication. A similar system is built in Chen et al. (2022), also incorporating implied sub-questions. Chen et al. (2023b) introduce a sub-sentence en-coder, a contextual embedding model that creates 23610 distinct embeddings for atomic facts within a sen-tence, and show its use in supporting fact retrieval and text attribution. Li et al. (2024) introduce SELF -C HECKER , a factuality verification method which extracts claims, generates queries from those claims, which are then used for retrieval and ulti-mately verification of claims. Tang et al. (2024) propose an efficient method for fact-checkin LLMs called MiniCheck. They construct GPT-4 synthetic training data to train a sentence-level fact-checker. We follow the decompose-then-verify frame-work, where the decomposition step can have a significant effect on downstream factuality scores. We build on previous work that explores different decomposition methods. We use the decomposi-tion technique of Wanner et al. (2024), who pro-pose a method grounded in Russellian and Neo-Davidsonian theory, and show its benefits over other methods. C ORE is a method for subclaim selection that filters based on uniqueness and in-formativeness (Jiang et al., 2024). Hu et al. (2024) examine the effect of including decomposition in fact verification pipelines, and find there exists a trade-off between accuracy and noise when using decomposition. 

2.2 Decontextualization 

Decontextualization is the technique of rewriting a sentence to stand alone, interpretable outside of the context of the passage in which it appears. Previous work (Choi et al., 2021) laid out a framework for decontextualization by editing a sentence in four different ways: (1) name completion, pronoun/NP swap, (2) discourse marker removal, (3) bridging global scope, and (4) addition. The last two edits involve adding text, including prepositional phrases or background information. Gunjal and Durrett (2024) examine the balance between decontextualization, making the sentence stand alone, and minimality, how little information is added. They examine this in the setting of biogra-phies of ambiguous entities, where one name could denote multiple different entities, specifically for fact verification. Wang et al. (2024) use decontex-tualization as a part of an end-to-end factuality an-notation solution for fact checking LLM responses. Wei et al. (2024) develop a method called Search-Augmented Factuality Evaluator (SAFE), for eval-uating the factuality of long-form LLM responses. Lee et al. (2024) build a dataset of ambiguous enti-ties (AmbigDocs), relevent to our case even though they do not include decontextualization. Beyond the application of fact verification, New-man et al. (2023) use decontextualization to rewrite snippets from scientific documents to stand alone. They use three steps: (1) question generation, (2) question answering, (3) rewriting. Potluri et al. (2023) propose an extract-and-decontextualize ap-proach for generating summaries of long-form an-swers to complex questions. Kane and Schubert (2023) experiment with zero- and few-shot decon-textualization using LLMs. 

3 Methods: Claim Decomposition and Decontextualization 

We now describe methods for decontextualization and decomposition that we adopt in our experi-ments. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 consider extenstively validated methods from prior work for decontextu-alization and decomposition, respectively, and Sec-tion 3.3 proposes a prompt-based method for joint decontextualization and decomposition (DnD). 

3.1 Decontextualization: Molecular Facts 

Gunjal and Durrett (2024) evaluate and compare existing decontextualization methods (Wei et al., 2024) on minimality and decontextuality. They call their method “Molecular Facts”, which they recom-mend above other methods of decontexualization due to its balance in minimality. This method uses a two-step prompt for decontextualizing a sentence: first using an LLM to identify ambiguities in the sentence, extracting the ambiguities in an outputted dictionary, and then prompting an LLM with these ambiguities to decontextualize the text. Because this decontextualization method was developed for human biographies, we adopt the Molecular Facts method for our experiments. We use GPT-4o mini for both disambiguation and decontextualization. 

3.2 Decomposition: DR-ND 

Wanner et al. (2024) investigated various decom-position methods and their faithfulness, coherence, and atomicity. Here, faithfulness denotes if the subclaim is consistent with the original claim. Co-herence ensures the subclaim is entailed by the original claim. Atomicity refers to how much aclaim is broken down into components. They intro-duced a method grounded in Russellian and Neo-Davidsonian theory, DR-ND , and find this method to have the highest atomicity in comparison with other methods, while still remaining faithful and coherent to the original claim. Their prompt-based method 23611 Claim: He first gained recognition in the mid-1990s for his starring role in the film "Schindler’s List," directed by Steven Spielberg. 

Decomposition Decomposition → Decontextualization 

He gained recognition in the mid-1990s. Liam Neeson, the actor from Northern Ireland, gained recog-nition in the mid-1990s. He gained recognition for his starring role. Liam Neeson, the actor from Northern Ireland, gained recog-nition for his starring role in the film "Schindler’s List." His starring role was in the film Schindler’s List. Liam Neeson’s starring role was in the film Schindler’s List. Schindler’s List is a film. "Schindler’s List," directed by Steven Spielberg, is a film. Steven Spielberg directed Schindler’s List. Steven Spielberg directed Schindler’s List. He gained recognition for his role in Schindler’s List in the mid-1990s. Liam Neeson gained recognition for his role in Schindler’s List in the mid-1990s. 

Decontextualized Claim Decomposition of Decontextualized Claim (Decontextual-ization → Decomposition) 

- Liam Neeson gained recognition in the mid-1990s. - Liam Neeson’s recognition was for his role in Schindler’s List. Liam Neeson first gained recognition in the - Liam Neeson had a starring role in Schindler’s List. mid-1990s for his starring role in the film - Schindler’s List is a film. "Schindler’s List," directed by Steven Spielberg. - Schindler’s List was directed by Steven Spielberg. - Liam Neeson gained recognition for his role in Schindler’s List in the mid-1990s. - Liam Neeson’s recognition came after Schindler’s List was released. 

Decomposition and Decontextualization Jointly: DnD 

Subclaims Decontextualized 

He gained recognition. Liam Neeson gained recognition. He gained recognition in the mid-1990s. Liam Neeson gained recognition in the mid-1990s. His recognition was for a starring role. Liam Neeson’s recognition was for a starring role. His starring role was in the film ‘Schindler’s List.’ Liam Neeson’s starring role was in the film ’Schindler’s List.’ ‘Schindler’s List’ is a film. ‘Schindler’s List’ is a film directed by Steven Spielberg. ‘Schindler’s List’ was directed by Steven Spielberg. ‘Schindler’s List’ was directed by Steven Spielberg. The film ‘Schindler’s List’ contributed to his recognition. The film ’Schindler’s List’ contributed to Liam Neeson’s recognition. The time period of the mid-1990s refers to the years around 1995. The time period of the mid-1990s refers to the years around 1995. 

Table 1: Examples of each method of decomposition and decontextualization. Decomposition and DnD subclaim sets are similar, and the decontextualized sets are similar. Decomposition is done using the DR-ND method described in section 3.2. We use the Molecular Facts method described in section 3.1 for decontextualization. We use DnD from section 3.3 for joint decomposition and decontextualization. 

uses high quality in-context decomposition exam-ples. We use DR-ND for all decompositions in our experiments. We use gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct 

for decomposition, as used in Wanner et al. (2024). 

3.3 Joint Decontextualization and Decomposition: DnD 

Running decomposition and decontextualization in sequence can create problems. These two steps fun-damentally interact, so considering each step inde-pendently poses limitations on the decisions made within the step. Additionally, running these in se-quence doubles the number of LLM calls. There-fore, we develop a new method called DnD (Decon-textualization and Decomposition) to obtain two sets of claims with just one LLM call. The first contains the decomposed subclaims of a sentence and the second set of claims contains the decontex-tualized form of each of the decomposed subclaims. Each claim in the subclaim set has a corresponding decontextualized claim in the decontextualized set. The prompt we developed for this method appears in Appendix A.3. We use GPT-4o mini for DnD. 

3.4 Decomposition Evaluation 

Previous work has proposed several different ways to measure the results of a decomposition method (Wanner et al., 2024). We use D ECOMP SCORE , in-troduced by Wanner et al. (2024), which measures the average number of supported (highly correlated with NLI entailment) subclaims per passage pro-duced. This metric indicates which method gener-ates the most subclaims that cohere with the sen-tence being decomposed. 23612 4 Methods: Claim Verification 

We consider two decompose-then-verify methods for claim verification. First, we adopt the widely used FA CT SCORE from previous work. We then propose a new method that utilizes decontextual-ization to better isolate the specific claim to verify. 

4.1 FA CT SCORE 

Decompose-Then-Verify metrics have become in-creasingly popular, including the introduction of FA CT SCORE (Min et al., 2023). FA CT SCORE 

is an LLM-based fact-checking pipeline that ver-ifies claims decomposed from a passage against a trusted reference source (e.g., Wikipedia), and the percentage of decomposed claims supported is the FA CT SCORE . We use FA CT SCORE as a baseline, however, it is insufficient for evaluating subclaims that require more context. We use Inst- 

> LLAMA

from FA CT SCORE , which is a LLAMA 7B trained on the Super Natural Instructions dataset (Wang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023), and run FA CT SCORE with the Inst-LLAMA + retrieval + NPM setting. 

4.2 DNDS CORE 

When a claim is augmented with context, it con-tains multiple atomic facts. When passed to a ver-ifier, such as FA CT SCORE , which fact is being verified? How do we ensure that the same context is not re-verified across multiple claims? We propose D NDS CORE , which modifies the prompt to include the source document, the sub-claim, and the augmented, decontextualized claim. The method is asked to verify the specific subclaim using the relevant context against the source doc-ument. The prompt appears in Appendix A.5. We use the same Inst-LLAMA described above. 

5 Results 

5.1 Data 

We use LLM generated biographies (FA CT SCORE )and QA responses (LFQA) in our experiments. 

FA CT SCORE Data The released data from Min et al. (2023) includes generated biographies from 12 language models of varying sizes. Entities for these biographies range from very rare to very fre-quent and span different nationalities. We do not generate new or modify existing biographies. The entity Wikipedia page is the reference source. 

LFQA Data The released data from Chen et al. (2023a) contains generated responses to ELI5 dataset (Fan et al., 2019), a dataset of dataset of threads from the Reddit forum “Explain Like I’m Five”. Reference sources are retrieved by humans, models, or randomly selected. We use the test split of the data as collected by Tang et al. (2024). 

5.2 Methods of Decomposition and Decontextualization 

We use the decomposition ( DR-ND ) and decontex-tualization (Molecular Facts) methods (Section 3) in sequence to evaluate the interactions of these two methods. We then evaluate our method DnD, using one LLM call for joint decomposition and decontextualization. We evaluate these approaches using D ECOMP SCORE and a qualitative analysis. The D ECOMP SCORE results are shown in Table 2, with full results in Table 10 in the Appendix. The D ECOMP SCORE remains high for each of the methods, indicating a high number of facts entailed by the original sentence. Despite more informa-tion being added to decontextualized claims, we see only a small increase D ECOMP SCORE . This suggests the added information for decontextual-ized claims is supported by the original claim, or a minimal enough addition that it does not change the entailment judgment.                    

> Method Avg D ECOMP -SCORE (%) Avg # Subclaims Decomp 95.69 43.48 Decomp →Decontext 95.87 43.48 Decontext →Decomp 96.80 45.48 DnD Subclaim 96.14 36.03 DnD Decontext 96.58 36.03
> Table 2: D ECOMP SCORE results for each decomposi-tion and decontextualization method on FA CT SCORE
> data. We report the two sets of claims returned by our joint approach (DnD) alongside both sequential ap-proaches. Scores remain high even with the use of decontextualization. Full results are in table 10.

Table 1 includes an example sentence and the result of each decomposition and decontextualiza-tion method. The decomposition and subclaims sets from DnD contain almost identical claims, in-dicating the new DnD is aligned with previously validated forms of decomposition. Similarly, the Decomposition → Decontextualization set, Decon-textualization → Decomposition set, and the DnD decontextualized set all contain similar claims, al-though the latter two contain more facts. Because 23613 the claim is decontextualized first in Decontextu-alization → Decomposition, the decontextualized subclaim decomposes into more subclaims than Decomposition → Decontextualization. The de-contextualized claim only replaces the pronoun and does not add any extra external information, which is expected in a simple sentence like this one. 

5.3 Fact Verification 

We evaluate FA CT SCORE using (1) decomposition only (as in the original paper (Min et al., 2023)), (2/3) using the decomposition and decontextual-ization methods in sequence (both decomposition 

→ decontextualization and decontextualization →

decomposition), and then the (4) subclaim set and (5) decontextualized set obtained from our DnD method. We then use our proposed fact verifica-tion method D NDS CORE , which requires context for each verified subclaim. When applying D ND-SCORE to the decomposition-only method, we use the original sentence as context and the decomposi-tion for the claim. For evaluating Decomposition 

→ Decontextualization, we can use the pairs of decomposed subclaims and their corresponding de-contextualized claim as context. We use the output of Decontextualization → Decomposition as the verified subclaim, and the decontextualized sen-tence as context. For DnD, we can just use the subclaim and corresponding decontextualized sub-claim as context for verification. FA CT SCORE and D NDS CORE results are shown in Table 3, with full FA CT SCORE results in Ta-ble 8 and full D NDS CORE results in Table 9 in the Appendix. The original FA CT SCORE method yields an average score of 33.00% and 43.48 av-erage subclaims per paragraph. By design, the Decomposition → Decontextualization method has the same number of subclaims, but almost 13% higher FA CT SCORE . The Decontextualization →

Decomposition generates the highest number of subclaims, with more information added into the original sentence in the decontextualization step, but still achieves around the same FA CT SCORE as Decomposition → Decontextualization. The DnD subclaim set receives a similar FA CT SCORE as de-composition only, and the DnD decontextualized set has a similar FA CT SCORE as Decomposition 

→ Decontextualization, but with fewer subclaims. The D NDS CORE evaluation is on average higher than the FA CT SCORE counterpart, while the num-ber of subclaims is the same, by design. The D ND-SCORE is highest for the Decontextualization →

Decomposition as verified subclaim, and decon-textualized claim as context at 61.51%. Verify-ing the decomposed subclaims with both the orig-inal sentence as context and the Decomposition 

→ Decontextualization as context achieves similar scores, within five percent. Evaluating the DnD method subclaim and decontextualization sets with DNDS CORE results in a score between the others (51.60%.) We show that factuality scores change when us-ing FA CT SCORE evaluated decontextualized sub-claims instead of decomposed subclaims, however using only these decontextualized claims is insuffi-cient. D NDS CORE addresses the ambiguity prob-lems of using decomposed subclaims, and the re-dundancy and loss of atomicity problems of using decontextualized subclaims. The FA CT SCORE and DNDS CORE evaluations in table 3 demonstrate that these factuality scores are changing. In the fol-lowing section, we aim to understand what causes these changes. 

6 Analysis 

We provide quantitative analyses in section 6.1 in order to understand how, how much, and why judg-ments change. Qualitative analyses in section 6.2 look at specific examples and their corresponding judgments. We analyze redundancy in section 6.3, and there are further analyses on tradeoffs and fail-ure cases in appendix section C. 

6.1 Verification Changes: Quantitative Evaluation 

Based on the change in factuality scores, we aim to understand: what makes a claim verifiable and what causes the changes of these factuality scores for the same passage? We perform anal-yses on FA CT SCORE generated biography data. We examine the D NDS CORE evaluation, and DnD FA CT SCORE evaluation of the subclaim set and de-contextualization set. We specifically study these results, because we can align them at a subclaim level and examine the different subclaims and cor-responding decontextualized claims evaluated by FA CT SCORE , and the pair evaluated by D ND-SCORE . Additionally, the decomposition only and the DnD subclaim set achieve a similar factuality score, and the Decomposition → Decontextualiza-tion achieves a similar factuality score as DnD de-contextualized set, and therefore we expect these sets of subclaims to be similar. 23614 FA CT SCORE Data LFQA Data Fact-uality Score Decompose Method Avg Score (%) Avg # Sub-claims Avg Score + CORE                                                                                      

> (%) Avg # Sub-claims + CORE
> Avg Score (%) Avg # Sub-claims Avg Score + CORE
> (%) Avg # Sub-claims + CORE
> FS DP Only 33.00 43.48 32.27 23.97 68.9 28.2 67.6 13.8 DP →DT 45.97 43.48 43.51 20.93 74.9 28.2 72.2 12.4 DT →DP 44.60 45.48 40.89 24.08 71.5 29.7 69.0 13.6 DnD DP 35.92 36.03 35.43 22.39 70.4 26.9 68.9 12.3 DnD DT 47.70 36.03 45.70 19.76 77.9 26.9 76.6 12.9 DS Context Verified Subclaim Original Sent. DP 41.53 43.48 41.38 23.97 79.2 28.2 81.8 13.8 DP →DT DP 46.44 43.48 46.80 23.97 87.7 28.2 89.2 13.8 DT Sent. DT →DP 61.51 45.48 59.18 24.08 80.2 29.7 82.9 13.6 DnD DT DnD DP 51.60 36.03 51.56 22.39 90.8 26.9 90.6 12.3

Table 3: Fact verification results on FA CT SCORE and LFQA data using different combinations of decomposition and decontextualization, and with two fact verification methods: FA CT SCORE (FS) and D NDS CORE (DS), a contextualized version of the former. We report the two sets of claims returned by our joint approach (DnD) alongside both sequential approaches (DP denotes decomposition, DT denotes decontextualization). These scores are averaged across different language model splits. The full data can be found in Tables 8 and 9 in the appendix. We additionally report the deduplicated FA CT SCORE , D NDS CORE , and average number of subclaims for each method, filtered with C ORE (Jiang et al., 2024). 

We first examine the percentage of claims whose support judgment changed. We find that be-tween DnD subclaim and DnD decontextualiza-tion FA CT SCORE evaluated sets, there is a 19.11% change in judgment, and 16.25% change from false to true when decontextualizing. 48.52% of these contain a pronoun replacement 1, suggesting that judgements become verifiable due to entity disam-biguation. DnD subclaim and DnD decontextual-ization FA CT SCORE evaluation changes from true to false only 3.26% of the time, 11.82% of these containing pronoun replacement. Incorrectly veri-fied claims were less of an issue. Between the DnD subclaim FA CT SCORE eval-uations and D NDS CORE evaluations, 16.97% of subclaim judgments change, with 16.50% chang-ing from false to true, and 0.48% changing from true to false. The addition of context rarely changes judgments to false, and instead only adds additional background or pronoun replacement that makes the claim easier to verify as correct. Human evalua-tion (section C.3) on a subset of the data support these findings. DNDS CORE evaluation helps ver-ify ambiguous claims, most often with pronoun replacement. 

> 1Subclaims which contain one or more common pronouns ("she", "her", "hers", "herself", "he", "him", "his", "himself", "they", "them", "theirs", and "themself"), which was not found in the decontextualized claim are indicated as having pronoun replacement.

6.2 Verification Changes: Qualitative Evaluation 

Context is important for fact verification, shown in Table 4. Here we look at DnD subclaim and de-contextualized subclaim pairs, each evaluated sepa-rately with FA CT SCORE , and corresponding D ND-SCORE judgments. We present examples where fac-tuality judgments disagree, demonstrate where the addition of context helps disambiguate the claim, and show how D NDS CORE can handle these cases. Example 1 in Table 4 shows an example where judgment changes from false to true, without pro-noun replacement. “Prince Daniel” is a name which could refer to the current member of the Swedish royal family (born 1973), the prince of Galicia (1201–1264), the Russian prince from 1261–1303, or Prince Daniel of Saxony (born 1975). The added information to the verified sub-claim disambiguates which “Prince Daniel” is the subject of the paragraph. Example 2 shows an example where FA CT SCORE validation changes from false to true with pronoun replacement . The pronoun “She” is replaced with “Susan Sarandon” disambiguating the subject of the sentence. The DNDS CORE for the first two examples is also cor-rectly judged as true with context. Examples 3 and 4 in Table 4 had a FA CT SCORE 

judgment changed from true to false. The third example, with no pronoun replacement, disam-biguates the referenced sitcom, changing if the 23615 Ex. # Subclaims FS DS                             

> 1Subclaim : Prince Daniel is a member of the Swedish royal family. False True
> Decontextualized : Prince Daniel, who is a sibling of Prince Carl Philip, is a member of the Swedish royal family. True 2Subclaim : She has appeared in several television series. False True
> Decontextualized : Susan Sarandon has appeared in several television series. True 3Subclaim : The sitcom featured Matthew Perry as a lead actor. True False
> Decontextualized : ‘The Matt Payne Show’ featured Matthew Perry as a lead actor. False 4Subclaim : She wrote for the school’s newspaper. True False
> Decontextualized : Nikole Hannah-Jones wrote for the newspaper of Wesleyan University. False 5Subclaim : He began his wrestling career. True True
> Decontextualized : Fuerza Guerrera, also known as Juan Conrado Aguilar Jáuregui, began his wrestling career. False 6Subclaim : A bit can be abbreviated. False True
> Decontextualized : A bit, which is the smallest unit of information in computing and digital communications, can be abbreviated. True 7Subclaim : Some of these factors include infections. False True
> Decontextualized : One of the factors that may contribute to less saliva production and/or thickened saliva is infections. True

Table 4: Examples from FA CT SCORE data (examples 1-5) and LFQA data (examples 6-7) of subclaims and decontextualized claims as generated by DnD, and FA CT SCORE (FS) evaluations, and the D NDS CORE (DS) evalutation for the pair of claims. Context helps evaluate the factuality of claims, and D NDS CORE can handle cases where incorrect context is added to the text. Examples 1 and 3 show decontextualization with added information, and examples 2, 4, and 5 demonstrate pronoun replacement. 

subclaim is verified 2. The fourth example replaces “She” with “Nikole Hannah-Jones”. Both examples are correctly judged as false using D NDS CORE .Examples 6 and 7 in Table 4 both come from the LFQA dataset. In both examples, the added information helps verify the subclaim. The first example disambiguates what “a bit” refers to: the unit of information in computing as opposed to a small amount. The second example enumerates “the factors” which are unknown from just the sub-claim, but interpretable with the decontextualized claim. In both these examples D NDS CORE cor-rectly marks the claim as true, showing the effec-tiveness of D NDS CORE outside the human biogra-phies domain. There is a lot of movement between the FA CT SCORE judgments of subclaims and the FA CT SCORE judgments of decontextualized claims. The additional context can help, as in the examples shown, however, there exist examples where decontextualization is not sufficient. In some cases, added contextual information is wrong, and masks the correctness of the subclaim being veri-fied. Example 5 in Table 4 concerns the Mexican wrestler Fuerza Guerrera where the atomic fact is 

> 2Matthew Perry did not appear in ‘The Matt Payne Show.’

true, but the information added to the decontextual-ized claim is false. 3 The FA CT SCORE evaluation of the subclaim is true, but false for the decontextu-alized claim, because “Conrado Aguilar Jáuregui” refers to a different Mexican wrestler. Despite this incorrect addition to the decontextualized subclaim, DNDS CORE evaluates the subclaim as true. D ND-SCORE verifies the subclaim, while still including the context. This ensures that the context helps to verify claims, but does not overshadow the sub-claim being verified. By handling these nuances, DNDS CORE proves to be a more robust method for fact verification. DNDS CORE helps both con-firm true subclaims and refute false subclaims originally judged incorrectly by FA CT SCORE .6.3 CORE for Subclaim Deduplication 

CORE (Jiang et al., 2024) filters sets of decomposed subclaims and formats subclaim subselection as a constrained optimization problem to eliminate du-plicated facts, which we apply at a generation level. Deduplication results are in Table 3. We use this filtering to analyze the different methods of de-contextualization, decomposition, and verification, however, it can (and should) be used to filter sets 

> 3Juan Conrado Aguilar Jáuregui is the name of a different wrestler, and is not another name for Fuerza Guerrera.

23616 of subclaims for verification to ensure scores are not inflated with many duplicated facts. The average set of filtered subclaims for all de-composition and decontextualization methods is between 19 and 25. Filtered subclaim size has less variance because C ORE filters to a core set of sub-claims. The DnD decontextualized set had more subclaims removed than the DnD subclaim set, in-dicating a more redundant decontextualized set. Figure 1 shows that the decontextualized form of subclaims is less atomic and includes information from other subclaims. The redundant subclaims are removed in the deduplication process. Filtering the subclaim DnD set results in the least number of facts, and decontextualize-then-decompose have the most remaining subclaims, due to added context having slightly different word-ing, and not fully being filtered out. For example, in the set of decontextualized-then-decomposed subclaims from Vicuna-7B on Dr. Dre, multiple claims stating something equivalent to “Dr. Dre was a rapper” were kept in the filter process, de-spite being semantically equivalent. This is an example of the repeated essential context added to each decontextualized sentence in the paragraph before decomposing as shown in the bottom right of Figure 1. The DnD sets contained fewer sub-claims, and thus had fewer subclaims removed dur-ing filtering. FA CT SCORE changes are within two percent for all deduplicated subclaim sets, except for decontextualize-then-decompose, which drops almost four percent. As shown in Figure 1, this method is at risk of containing duplicated essential context across sentences. 

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we consider the interactions of decom-position and decontextualization in a fact verifica-tion system. We introduce DnD, a prompt-based method for extracting subclaims and correspond-ing decontextualized forms. Using pairs of sub-claims and decontextualized claims, we propose a new decompose-then-verify method, D NDS CORE ,which validates claims with a given context. We demonstrate cases where verification judgment dif-fers, and show D NDS CORE is able to handle con-text better than previous measures of factuality. 

Limitations 

Although we demonstrate the robustness of D ND-SCORE in handling ambiguities, which is especially important in verification of generations with many entities, we only consider its use in fact verifica-tion of generated biographies and QA settings. Our work does not show the use of D NDS CORE in any other domains. DNDS CORE is not intended to handle debatable claims, such as opinions. Previous work has ex-amined factuality scores of only verifiable claims (Song et al., 2024), which could be integrated into DNDS CORE , such that D NDS CORE only evaluates these verifiable claims. The reference documents are static in this study, but using decontextualized subclaims for reference document retrieval is a possible line of future work, that would allow this method to work on arbitrary generations, instead of generations on a predeter-mined topic. A important limitation of our evaluation is the underlying dataset, a set of biographies for which the correct source (Wikipedia) documents are avail-able for verification. In a production system, we may find source document selection errors due to the information retrieval process. We hypothesize that these will increase verification confusions, and the differences between our approaches and pre-vious work will grow. Additionally, while biogra-phies center on a single individual, other generation types, e.g. news updates, may include multiple en-tities and increase verification confusion. This work is only done in the language of En-glish, although we expect these results would hold in other languages. 

Ethics Statement 

LLMs are prone to hallucination, which can re-sult in the spread of misinformation. Mitigating these hallucinations is important and still actively being researched. The decomposition and decon-textualization methods in this work are at risk of injecting hallucinated information not in the origi-nal claim. Evaluation of these untrue generations are necessary to ensure the reliability of them, and care should be taken when trusting these genera-tions. 

References 

> Hung-Ting Chen, Fangyuan Xu, Shane Arora, and Eun-sol Choi. 2023a. Understanding retrieval augmenta-tion for long-form question answering. Jifan Chen, Grace Kim, Aniruddh Sriram, Greg Durrett, and Eunsol Choi. 2024. Complex claim verification

23617 with evidence retrieved in the wild. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3569–3587, Mexico City, Mexico. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Jifan Chen, Aniruddh Sriram, Eunsol Choi, and Greg Durrett. 2022. Generating literal and implied sub-questions to fact-check complex claims. In Proceed-ings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3495–3516, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sihao Chen, Hongming Zhang, Tong Chen, Ben Zhou, Wenhao Yu, Dian Yu, Baolin Peng, Hongwei Wang, Dan Roth, and Dong Yu. 2023b. Sub-sentence en-coder: Contrastive learning of propositional semantic representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04335 .Eunsol Choi, Jennimaria Palomaki, Matthew Lamm, Tom Kwiatkowski, Dipanjan Das, and Michael Collins. 2021. Decontextualization: Making sen-tences stand-alone. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 9:447–461. Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grang-ier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. 2019. ELI5: Long form question answering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 3558–3567, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Anisha Gunjal and Greg Durrett. 2024. Molecular facts: Desiderata for decontextualization in llm fact verifi-cation. Qisheng Hu, Quanyu Long, and Wenya Wang. 2024. Decomposition dilemmas: Does claim decomposi-tion boost or burden fact-checking performance? Zhengping Jiang, Jingyu Zhang, Nathaniel Weir, Seth Ebner, Miriam Wanner, Kate Sanders, Daniel Khashabi, Anqi Liu, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2024. Core: Robust factual precision with informative sub-claim identification. Liqiang Jing, Ruosen Li, Yunmo Chen, Mengzhao Jia, and Xinya Du. 2023. Faithscore: Evaluating halluci-nations in large vision-language models. Ryo Kamoi, Tanya Goyal, Juan Diego Rodriguez, and Greg Durrett. 2023. WiCE: Real-world entailment for claims in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 7561–7583, Singapore. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Benjamin Kane and Lenhart Schubert. 2023. Get the gist? using large language models for few-shot de-contextualization. Yoonsang Lee, Xi Ye, and Eunsol Choi. 2024. Am-bigdocs: Reasoning across documents on different entities under the same name. Miaoran Li, Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Zhu Zhang. 2024. Self-checker: Plug-and-play modules for fact-checking with large language mod-els. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pages 163–181, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle-moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12076–12100, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Benjamin Newman, Luca Soldaini, Raymond Fok, Ar-man Cohan, and Kyle Lo. 2023. A question answer-ing framework for decontextualizing user-facing snip-pets from scientific documents. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3194–3212, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abhilash Potluri, Fangyuan Xu, and Eunsol Choi. 2023. Concise answers to complex questions: Summariza-tion of long-form answers. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9709–9728, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yixiao Song, Yekyung Kim, and Mohit Iyyer. 2024. VeriScore: Evaluating the factuality of verifiable claims in long-form text generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 9447–9474, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Liyan Tang, Philippe Laban, and Greg Durrett. 2024. Minicheck: Efficient fact-checking of llms on ground-ing documents. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormo-labashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, Atharva Naik, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Anjana Arunkumar, David Stap, Eshaan Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Lai, Ishan Puro-hit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Anderson, Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Maitreya Patel, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir Parmar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh Puri, Rushang Karia, Savan Doshi, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan 23618 Reddy A, Sumanta Patro, Tanay Dixit, and Xudong Shen. 2022. Super-NaturalInstructions: Generaliza-tion via declarative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5085–5109, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Yuxia Wang, Revanth Gangi Reddy, Zain Muhammad Mujahid, Arnav Arora, Aleksandr Rubashevskii, Ji-ahui Geng, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Liangming Pan, Nadav Borenstein, Aditya Pillai, Isabelle Au-genstein, Iryna Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. 2024. Factcheck-bench: Fine-grained evaluation bench-mark for automatic fact-checkers. Miriam Wanner, Seth Ebner, Zhengping Jiang, Mark Dredze, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2024. A closer look at claim decomposition. In Proceedings of the 13th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2024) , pages 153–175, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu, Nathan Hu, Jie Huang, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, and Quoc V. Le. 2024. Long-form factuality in large language mod-els. 23619 A Prompts 

A.1 Decomposition Prompt 

We use the DR-ND prompt from Wanner et al. (2024). Their prompt uses dynamically retrieved in-context decompositions. 

A.2 Decontextualization Prompt 

We use the Molecular Facts prompt from Gunjal and Durrett (2024). They use a two step prompting methods, with the first prompt identifying ambigu-ities in a claim, and the second prompt using the identified ambiguities to decontextualize the claim. 

A.3 DnD Prompt 

The DnD prompt for extracting pairs of subclaims and their decontextualized form can be found in Tables 5-7. We use the ambiguity criteria outlined in the Molecular Facts prompt and decomposed in-context examples from DR-ND .

A.4 FA CT SCORE Prompt 

We use the FA CT SCORE prompt from Min et al. (2023) shown below. This prompt provides a refer-ence document and asks if an atomic fact is true or false. 

> Answer the question about [TOPIC] based on the given context. Title: [REFERENCE DOC SECTION TITLE] Text: [REFERENCE DOC CONTENT] Input: [ATOM] True or False? Output:

A.5 DNDS CORE Prompt 

The following is the D NDS CORE prompt used for factuality verification of claims given the decontex-tualized form of the claim. This prompt is adapted from FA CT SCORE , but includes the decontextual-ized claim as context for the atomic claim. 

> Answer the question about [TOPIC] based on the given reference document and context. Reference Document: [REFERENCE DOC] Given the following context: "[DECONTEXT CLAIM]" Input: Is "[ATOM]" True or False? Output:

A.6 Compute 

Decomposition and decontextualization experi-ments were run on a GPU cluster with Quadro RTX 6000. We estimate experiments took around 400 GPU-hours. 

B Full Results 

B.1 FA CT SCORE Results 

The full FA CT SCORE results for each language model split from the FA CT SCORE data are in Table 8. 

B.2 DNDS CORE Results 

The full D NDS CORE results for each language model split from the FA CT SCORE data are in Table 9. 

B.3 DECOMP SCORE Results 

The full D ECOMP SCORE results for each language model split from the FA CT SCORE data are in Table 10. 

C Further Analysis 

C.1 Tradeoffs 

Due to the longer prompt lengths in DND-SCORE , the cost of using this method is slightly higher. Based on the data of this paper, running FA CT SCORE on one passage averages a total of 78,057 input tokens, with an average total of 89,335 input tokens for D NDS CORE . FA CT SCORE uses about 6,212 input tokens on atomic fact generation and 71,845 on evaluation. D NDS CORE uses about 15,878 input tokens on DnD and 73,457 on eval-uation. This difference is minimal, and less than a cent difference per passage. The tokens from the knowledge sources in the evaluation step over-shadow the difference in token length for atomic fact generation in FA CT SCORE , and the respec-tive DnD in D NDS CORE . The prompt and re-sponse for DnD is longer than the FA CT SCORE 

decomposition prompt, but there are also fewer sub-claims extracted, and thus fewer calls to the verifier model. Although D NDS CORE is more expensive it crucially disambiguates cases with many entities, which is necessary for verification. The computa-tional overhead of D NDS CORE is marginally more than FA CT SCORE , but results in disambiguated passage verification. 

C.2 Failure Cases 

The only case where D NDS CORE may introduce error is when the FA CT SCORE evaluation on the subclaim is true, FA CT SCORE evaluation on the de-contextualized subclaim is false, and D NDS CORE 

evaluation is true. In this case, the decontextual-ized information is incorrect, but the D NDS CORE 23620 Ambiguity Criteria: Ambiguity manifests in diverse forms, including: - Similar names denoting distinct entities. - Varied interpretations stemming from insufficient information. - Multiple understandings arising from vague or unclear information. Instructions: - You are given a paragraph, and one sentence from the paragraph to decompose and decontextualize. - First decompose the sentence into subclaims. Only use information from the sentence, and do not add any external information. - Then using those subclaims, write a decontextualized version of each subclaim. - In the decontextualized version, include all necessary information to disambiguate any entities or events in the subclaim using the ambiguity criteria above. - In the decontextualized version, only use information from the paragraph. Do not add any external information. - Provide an explanation of what ambiguities need to be resolved Format your response as a combination of decomposition and a dictionary with pairs of context and subclaims: ##PARAGRAPH##: <paragraph> ##SENTENCE##: <sentence> ##SUBCLAIMS##: <list-of-subclaims> ##EXPLANATION##: <explanations> ##CONTEXT-SUBCLAIM PAIRS##: [{"subclaim": <subclaim1>, "decontextualized": <context1>}, {"subclaim": <subclaim2>, "decontextualized": <context2>}, ... ]Example 1: ##PARAGRAPH##: Michael Collins (born October 31, 1930) is a retired American astronaut and test pilot who was the Command Module Pilot for the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He orbited the Moon in the command module Columbia while Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin made their historic landing. Born in Rome, Italy, Collins graduated from the U.S. Military Academy in 1952, joining a family tradition of military service, and went on to become a test pilot in the U.S. Air Force. Selected as an astronaut in 1963, he flew two space missions, Gemini 10 in 1966 and Apollo 11 in 1969, making him one of only 24 people to travel to the Moon. Collins was an accomplished astronaut, becoming the fourth person to conduct a spacewalk and the first to perform multiple spacewalks. After leaving NASA in 1970, he served as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, later directing the National Air and Space Museum. He also held senior roles at the Smithsonian and in private aerospace, eventually founding his own consulting firm. Collins and his Apollo 11 crewmates received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1969 and the Congressional Gold Medal in 2011. ##SENTENCE##: Michael Collins (born October 31, 1930) is a retired American astronaut and test pilot who was the Command Module Pilot for the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. ##SUBCLAIMS##: - Michael Collins was born in October. - Michael Collins was born on the 31st day of a month. - Michael Collins was born in 1930. - Michael Collins is retired. - Michael Collins is American. - Michael Collins was an astronaut. - Michael Collins was a test pilot. - Michael Collins participated in the Apollo 11 mission. - Michael Collins's participation in the Apollo 11 mission occurred in 1969. - The Apollo 11 mission was active in 1969. - The day of Michael Collins's birth occurred before his year of participation in the Apollo 11 mission. - The Apollo 11 mission had a Command Module Pilot. - Michael Collins's role in the Apollo 11 mission was as the Command Module Pilot. ##EXPLANATION##: "Michael Collins" needs to be disambiguated as the astronaut associated with the Apollo 11 mission to distinguish him from other potential individuals with similar names. 

Table 5: 1/3 of the DnD method for extracting subclaims and corresponding decontextualized subclaims. More details can be found in appendix section A.3. 

method is still able to verify the subclaim as cor-rect. We find that in our experiments this is a rare occurrence, only happening 3% of the time. We expect this proportion may change with different data. 

C.3 Human Evaluation 

We perform human annotation on a small 100 in-stance subset of the LFQA data, specifically where FA CT SCORE judgments flip (i.e. subclaim is true and decontextualized subclaim is false, or vice versa). We assess the groundedness with respect to the grounding document, which we assume is fac-23621 ##CONTEXT-SUBCLAIM PAIRS##: [{"subclaim": "Michael Collins was born in October.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and test pilot, was born in October."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins was born on the 31st day of a month.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and test pilot, was born on the 31st day of a month."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins was born in 1930.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and test pilot, was born in 1930."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins is retired.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and test pilot, is retired."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins is American.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the American astronaut, is American."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins was an astronaut.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and Command Module Pilot for the Apollo 11 mission, was an astronaut."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins was a test pilot.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and test pilot, was the Command Module Pilot for the Apollo 11 mission in 1969."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins participated in the Apollo 11 mission.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins, the retired American astronaut and test pilot, participated in the Apollo 11 mission."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins's participation in the Apollo 11 mission occurred in 1969.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins's participation in the Apollo 11 mission as the Command Module Pilot occurred in 1969."}, {"subclaim": "The Apollo 11 mission was active in 1969.", "decontextualized": "The Apollo 11 mission, which involved human spaceflight to the Moon, was active in 1969."}, {"subclaim": "The day of Michael Collins's birth occurred before his year of participation in the Apollo 11 mission.", "decontextualized": "The day of Michael Collins's birth on October 31, 1930, occurred before his year of participation in the Apollo 11 mission."}, {"subclaim": "The Apollo 11 mission had a Command Module Pilot.", "decontextualized": "The Apollo 11 mission had Michael Collins as its Command Module Pilot."}, {"subclaim": "Michael Collins's role in the Apollo 11 mission was as the Command Module Pilot.", "decontextualized": "Michael Collins's role in the Apollo 11 mission was as the Command Module Pilot."} ]Example 2: ##PARAGRAPH##: Stephen Miller (born August 23, 1985) is an American political advisor who served as a senior advisor for policy and director of speechwriting to President Donald Trump. Miller has been described as the architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies, and has previously worked for Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions on immigration issues. Miller was instrumental in shaping several of Trump's key policies, including the travel ban, a reduction in refugee admissions, and family separations at the border. He began his career in communications roles for conservative legislators, including Senators Jeff Sessions, Michele Bachmann, and John Shadegg. As Trump's speechwriter, Miller helped draft the inaugural address and served as a trusted advisor from the early days of the administration. He also played a significant role in the resignation of Secretary of Homeland Security Kirstjen Nielsen, whom he deemed insufficiently strict on immigration. As a White House spokesperson, Miller made several unsubstantiated claims about election fraud and promoted content from white nationalist sources, leading to his inclusion on the Southern Poverty Law Center's list of extremists. 

Table 6: 2/3 of the DnD method for extracting subclaims and corresponding decontextualized subclaims. More details can be found in appendix section A.3. 

tual. We provide the annotator with (1) the query, (2) the passage, (3) the subclaims, (4) the decon-textualized subclaims, and (5) the grounding docu-ment. So as not to bias the annotator, we do not pro-vide the FA CT SCORE or D NDS CORE judgments. For each subclaim and decontextualized subclaim we ask the annotator: 1. Given the grounding document, is the sub-claim from the passage True or False? (op-tions: True/False/Not enough information) 2. Given the grounding document, is the decon-textualized subclaim from the passage True or False? (options: True/False/Not enough information) 3. Does the subclaim contain enough informa-tion to correctly judge it as true/false? (op-tions: Yes/No) 4. Does the decontextualized subclaim contain enough information to correctly judge it as true/false? (options: Yes/No) We find that the subclaim FA CT SCORE and an-notator agree 16% of the time, and the decontextu-23622 ##SENTENCE##: Miller has been described as the architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies, and has previously worked for Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions on immigration issues. ##SUBCLAIMS##: - Miller has been described. - Miller has been described as an architect. - Miller has been described as an architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies. - Trump has immigration policies. - Trump's immigration policies are controversial. - Miller worked for Jeff Sessions. - Jeff Sessions is a Senator. - Jeff Sessions represents Alabama. - Miller worked on immigration issues. - Miller's work for Jeff Sessions involved immigration issues. ##EXPLANATION##: "Miller" needs to be disabiguated as Stephen Miller, a political advisor for Donald Trump, to avoid confusion with other individuals with the same name. Clarify that "Trump's immigration policies" refers specifically to policies developed during Donald Trump's presidency, as "Trump" alone may be ambiguous in a different context. ##CONTEXT-SUBCLAIM PAIRS##: [{"subclaim": "Miller has been described.", "decontextualized": "Miller, the architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies, has been described."}, {"subclaim": "Miller has been described as an architect.", "decontextualized": "Miller, who has been described as the architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies, has been described as an architect."}, {"subclaim": "Miller has been described as an architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies.", "decontextualized": "Stephen Miller has been described as an architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies."}, {"subclaim": "Trump has immigration policies.", "decontextualized": "Donald Trump has immigration policies."}, {"subclaim": "Trump's immigration policies are controversial.", "decontextualized": "Donald Trump's immigration policies are controversial."}, {"subclaim": "Miller worked for Jeff Sessions.", "decontextualized": "Miller, the architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies, worked for Jeff Sessions."}, {"subclaim": "Jeff Sessions is a Senator.", "decontextualized": "Jeff Sessions is a Senator from Alabama."}, {"subclaim": "Jeff Sessions represents Alabama.", "decontextualized": "Jeff Sessions represents the state of Alabama."}, {"subclaim": "Miller worked on immigration issues.", "decontextualized": "Miller, the architect of Trump's controversial immigration policies, worked on immigration issues."}, {"subclaim": "Miller's work for Jeff Sessions involved immigration issues.", "decontextualized": "Stephen Miller's work for Jeff Sessions involved immigration issues."}, ]Your task: ##PARAGRAPH##: [paragraph] ##SENTENCE##: [sentence] ##SUBCLAIMS##: 

Table 7: 3/3 of the DnD method for extracting subclaims and corresponding decontextualized subclaims. More details can be found in appendix section A.3. 

alized subclaim FA CT SCORE and annotator agree 77% of the time (from question 1/2). The D ND-SCORE and annotator agree 76% of the time (from question 1). From question two, the percentage of subclaims with enough information to judge are 54% and decontextualized subclaims with enough information to judge are 88%, indicating that the decontextualization step is important. These results indicate that when FA CT SCORE judgments flip, the original subclaim tends to be ambiguous, and the decontextualization step crucially disambiguates the subclaim. 23623 Decompose Method LM Split FA CT SCORE (%) # Subclaims Decomp Only Alpaca 7B 35.0 22.2 Alpaca 13B 38.9 22.0 Alpaca 65B 44.0 22.2 ChatGPT 48.2 44.2 Dolly 12B 16.5 33.0 GPT-4 51.1 77.7 InstructGPT 40.1 36.3 MPT-Chat 7B 24.8 49.0 Oasst-pythia 12B 20.1 57.7 StableLM 7B 13.8 40.4 Vicuna 7B 32.4 59.8 Vicuna 13B 31.1 57.3 Decomp → Decontext Alpaca 7B 49.8 22.2 Alpaca 13B 52.8 22.0 Alpaca 65B 60.6 22.2 ChatGPT 66.6 44.2 Dolly 12B 22.3 33.0 GPT-4 71.8 77.7 InstructGPT 57.0 36.3 MPT-Chat 7B 33.7 49.0 Oasst-pythia 12B 29.4 57.7 StableLM 7B 17.8 40.4 Vicuna 7B 46.5 59.8 Vicuna 13B 43.4 57.3 Decontext → Decomp Alpaca 7B 48.3 24.2 Alpaca 13B 51.2 23.7 Alpaca 65B 57.2 24.1 ChatGPT 61.6 45.5 Dolly 12B 24.1 34.7 GPT-4 64.6 79.9 InstructGPT 53.5 38.4 MPT-Chat 7B 33.9 50.8 Oasst-pythia 12B 31.0 59.1 StableLM 7B 21.4 42.5 Vicuna 7B 45.1 61.2 Vicuna 13B 43.3 61.7 DnD Subclaim Alpaca 7B 36.8 20.7 Alpaca 13B 41.3 20.0 Alpaca 65B 46.5 20.2 ChatGPT 53.6 37.9 Dolly 12B 18.1 30.1 GPT-4 56.3 61.8 InstructGPT 43.4 31.7 MPT-Chat 7B 26.5 40.6 Oasst-pythia 12B 21.5 43.1 StableLM 7B 15.1 33.5 Vicuna 7B 35.9 47.5 Vicuna 13B 36.0 45.2 DnD Decontextualized Alpaca 7B 52.0 20.7 Alpaca 13B 54.4 20.0 Alpaca 65B 62.3 20.2 ChatGPT 69.2 37.9 Dolly 12B 23.8 30.1 GPT-4 73.7 61.8 InstructGPT 59.8 31.7 MPT-Chat 7B 34.9 40.6 Oasst-pythia 12B 29.7 43.1 StableLM 7B 18.0 33.5 Vicuna 7B 48.3 47.5 Vicuna 13B 46.3 45.2 

Table 8: The FA CT SCORE for different language model splits, the results of which are aggregated in Table 3. The factuality ranking of these language models stays consistent, however the scores differ. 23624 Decompose Method LM Split DNDS CORE (%) # Subclaims 

Context: Original Sentence 

Verified Subclaim: 

Decomp Alpaca 7B 43.6 22.2 Alpaca 13B 46.8 22.0 Alpaca 65B 51.0 22.2 ChatGPT 53.8 44.2 Dolly 12B 25.6 33.0 GPT-4 57.8 77.7 InstructGPT 47.8 36.3 MPT-Chat 7B 36.8 49.0 Oasst-pythia 12B 31.5 57.7 StableLM 7B 22.0 40.4 Vicuna 7B 41.7 59.8 Vicuna 13B 40.0 57.3 

Context: Decomp →

Decontext 

Verified Subclaim: 

Decomp Alpaca 7B 49.9 22.2 Alpaca 13B 52.7 22.0 Alpaca 65B 57.9 22.2 ChatGPT 58.9 44.2 Dolly 12B 30.6 33.0 GPT-4 62.6 77.7 InstructGPT 53.9 36.3 MPT-Chat 7B 40.7 49.0 Oasst-pythia 12B 33.8 57.7 StableLM 7B 25.3 40.4 Vicuna 7B 46.0 59.8 Vicuna 13B 45.0 57.3 

Context: Decontext Sentence 

Verified Subclaim: 

Decontext → Decomp Alpaca 7B 68.2 24.2 Alpaca 13B 68.8 23.7 Alpaca 65B 73.1 24.1 ChatGPT 69.6 45.5 Dolly 12B 46.5 34.7 GPT-4 73.5 79.9 InstructGPT 70.2 38.4 MPT-Chat 7B 55.8 50.8 Oasst-pythia 12B 54.8 59.1 StableLM 7B 38.9 42.5 Vicuna 7B 62.4 61.2 Vicuna 13B 56.3 61.7 

Context: DnD Decontextualized 

Verified Subclaim: 

DnD Subclaim Alpaca 7B 53.9 20.7 Alpaca 13B 57.0 20.0 Alpaca 65B 61.5 20.2 ChatGPT 65.4 37.9 Dolly 12B 37.2 30.1 GPT-4 69.4 61.8 InstructGPT 58.6 31.7 MPT-Chat 7B 44.9 40.6 Oasst-pythia 12B 38.3 43.1 StableLM 7B 29.4 33.5 Vicuna 7B 51.7 47.5 Vicuna 13B 51.9 45.2 

Table 9: The D NDS CORE for different language model splits, the results of which are aggregated in Table 3. The factuality ranking of these language models stays consistent, however the scores differ. 23625 Decompose Method LM Split DECOMP SCORE 

(%) # Subclaims Decomp Only Alpaca 7B 98.7 22.2 Alpaca 13B 98.6 22.0 Alpaca 65B 98.6 22.2 ChatGPT 93.0 44.2 Dolly 12B 97.4 33.0 GPT-4 96.2 77.7 InstructGPT 98.1 36.3 MPT-Chat 7B 96.5 49.0 Oasst-pythia 12B 98.3 57.7 StableLM 7B 89.2 40.4 Vicuna 7B 94.8 59.8 Vicuna 13B 88.9 57.3 Decomp → Decontext Alpaca 7B 99.1 22.2 Alpaca 13B 99.0 22.0 Alpaca 65B 98.9 22.2 ChatGPT 92.9 44.2 Dolly 12B 97.8 33.0 GPT-4 96.3 77.7 InstructGPT 98.6 36.3 MPT-Chat 7B 96.3 49.0 Oasst-pythia 12B 98.5 57.7 StableLM 7B 88.1 40.4 Vicuna 7B 95.3 59.8 Vicuna 13B 89.7 57.3 Decontext → Decomp Alpaca 7B 99.0 24.2 Alpaca 13B 99.1 23.7 Alpaca 65B 99.1 24.1 ChatGPT 95.1 45.5 Dolly 12B 98.1 34.7 GPT-4 96.8 79.9 InstructGPT 98.5 38.4 MPT-Chat 7B 97.0 50.8 Oasst-pythia 12B 98.5 59.1 StableLM 7B 92.4 42.5 Vicuna 7B 96.4 61.2 Vicuna 13B 91.6 61.7 DnD Subclaim Alpaca 7B 98.9 20.7 Alpaca 13B 99.0 20.0 Alpaca 65B 99.1 20.2 ChatGPT 92.7 37.9 Dolly 12B 98.1 30.1 GPT-4 96.0 61.8 InstructGPT 98.9 31.7 MPT-Chat 7B 97.1 40.6 Oasst-pythia 12B 99.1 43.1 StableLM 7B 89.8 33.5 Vicuna 7B 95.6 47.5 Vicuna 13B 89.4 45.2 DnD Decontextualized Alpaca 7B 99.4 20.7 Alpaca 13B 99.3 20.0 Alpaca 65B 99.4 20.2 ChatGPT 94.0 37.9 Dolly 12B 98.6 30.1 GPT-4 96.4 61.8 InstructGPT 99.4 31.7 MPT-Chat 7B 96.9 40.6 Oasst-pythia 12B 99.1 43.1 StableLM 7B 88.4 33.5 Vicuna 7B 96.7 47.5 Vicuna 13B 91.3 45.2 

Table 10: The D ECOMP SCORE for different language model splits, the results of which are aggregated in Table 2. The D ECOMP SCORE remains high despite additional new information for decontextualized subclaims. 23626