Title: 2024.acl-long.645.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.645.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 27 Aug 2024 13:06:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 11943–11954 August 11-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Document-level Claim Extraction and Decontextualisation for Fact-Checking 

Zhenyun Deng, Michael Schlichtkrull, Andreas Vlachos 

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge {zd302, mss84, av308}@cam.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Selecting which claims to check is a time-consuming task for human fact-checkers, es-pecially from documents consisting of multi-ple sentences and containing multiple claims. However, existing claim extraction approaches focus more on identifying and extracting claims from individual sentences, e.g., identifying whether a sentence contains a claim or the exact boundaries of the claim within a sentence. In this paper, we propose a method for document-level claim extraction for fact-checking, which aims to extract check-worthy claims from doc-uments and decontextualise them so that they can be understood out of context. Specifically, we first recast claim extraction as extractive summarization in order to identify central sen-tences from documents, then rewrite them to include necessary context from the originat-ing document through sentence decontextuali-sation. Evaluation with both automatic metrics and a fact-checking professional shows that our method is able to extract check-worthy claims from documents more accurately than previous work, while also improving evidence retrieval. 

1 Introduction 

Human fact-checkers typically select a claim in the beginning of their day to work on for the rest of it. Claim extraction (CE) is an important part of their work, as the overwhelming volume of claims in circulation means the choice of what to fact-check greatly affects the fact-checkers’ impact (Konstanti-novskiy et al., 2021). Automated approaches to this task have been proposed to assist them in selecting check-worthy claims, i.e., claims that the public has an interest in knowing the truth (Hassan et al., 2017a; Guo et al., 2022). Existing CE methods mainly focus on detecting whether a sentence contains a claim (Reddy et al., 2021; Nakov et al., 2021b) or the boundaries of the claim within a sentence (Wührl and Klinger, 2021; Sundriyal et al., 2022). In real-world scenarios though, claims often need to be extracted from documents consisting of multiple sentences and containing multiple claims, not all of which are relevant to the central idea of the document, and verifying all claims manually or even automatically would be inefficient. Moving from sentence-level CE to document-level CE is challenging; we illustrate this with the example in Figure 1. Sentences in orange are claims selected by a popular sentence-level CE method, Claimbuster (Hassan et al., 2017b), that are worth checking in principle but do not al-ways relate to the central idea of the document, and multiple sentences with similar claims are se-lected, which would not all need to be fact-checked (e.g., sentences 1 and 6). Claims extracted for fact-checking are expected to be unambiguous (Lippi and Torroni, 2015; Wührl and Klinger, 2021), which means that they cannot be misinterpreted or misunderstood when they are considered outside the context of the document they were extracted from, conse-quently allowing them to be fact-checked more easily (Schlichtkrull et al., 2023). Figure 1 shows an example of claim decontextualisation, where the claim “ Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East ...... ” requires coreference reso-lution to be understood out of context, e.g., “Bird ”refers to “ California scooter sharing start-up Bird ”. However, existing CE methods primarily focus on extracting sentence-level claims ( i.e., extracting sentences that contain a claim) from the original document (Reddy et al., 2021) and ignore their de-contextualisation, resulting in claims that are not unambiguously understood and verified. To address these issues, we propose a novel method for document-level claim extraction and decontexualisation for fact-checking, aiming to extract salient check-worthy claims from docu-ments that can be understood outside the context of the document. Specifically, assuming that salient 

11943 Document (CNBC News)      

> [1] Between 8,000 and 10,000 e-scooters are being destroyed in the Middle East by California scooter sharing start-up Bird, according to sources. [2] They belong to Circ, an e-scooter company that was acquired by Bird in January. [3] Bird shut down its entire Middle East operation as a result of Covid-19. [4] Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East and shutting down its operations in the majority of the region as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, according to five people familiar with the matter. [5]The e-scooters being scrapped belong to Circ, which was acquired by Bird for an undisclosed sum in January. [6] There are between 8,000 and 10,000 Circ
> scooters across cities in Qatar, Bahrain and United Arab Emirates , according to one former employee and one company source who
> asked to be kept anonymous as they’ve signed a confidentiality agreement. ……. [7] But there have been questions about the longevity of their vehicles, with reports suggesting some Bird e-scooters have a life span of just a few months. [8] Last week, it emerged that Uber is scrapping thousands of e-bikes and e-scooters worth millions of dollars after selling its Jump unit to mobility start-up Lime. …….

Document-level Claim Extraction     

> Sentence-level: 8, 6, 1 Document-level: 4, 5, 7
> Gold Claim (Fact-checking Organization, Misbar):
> Bird e-scooters are shutting down service in the Middle East, and scrapping as many as 10,000 scooters.
> Claim extracted by decontextualising the 4 th sentence:
> California scooter sharing start-up Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East and shutting down its operations in the majority of the region as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, according to five people familiar with the matter.

https://web.archive.org/web/20210722180850/https://misbar.com/en/factcheck/2020/06/18/are-bird-e-scooters-leaving-the-middle-east Figure 1: An example of document-level claim extraction. Document 1 is a piece of news from CNBC. Gold Claim 2

is annotated by the fact-checking organization, Misbar. Sentences in orange denote check-worthy claims extracted by sentence-level CE (Claimbuster). Sentences in blue denote salient claims extracted by our document-level CE. The claim in green is a decontextualised claim derived from the 4th sentence obtained by our document-level CE. 

claims are derived from central sentences, i) we re-cast the document-level CE task into the extractive summarization task to extract central sentences and reduce redundancy; ii ) we decontextualise central sentences to be understandable out of context by enriching them with the necessary context; iii ) we introduce a QA-based framework to obtain the nec-essary context by resolving ambiguous information units in the extracted sentence. To evaluate our method we derive a CE dataset 3

containing decontextualised claims from AVeriTeC (Schlichtkrull et al., 2023), a recently proposed benchmark for real-world claim extraction and veri-fication. Our method achieves a Precision@1 score of 47.8 on identifying central sentences, a 10 %

improvement over Claimbuster. This was verified further by a fact-checking professional, as the sen-tences returned by our method were deemed cen-tral to the document more often, and check-worthy more often than those extracted by Claimbuster. Additionally, our method achieved a character-level F score (chrF) (Popovi´ c, 2015) of 26.4 against gold decontextualised claims, outperforming all base-lines. When evaluated for evidence retrieval poten-tial, the decontextualised claims obtained by enrich-ing original sentences with the necessary context, are better than the original claim sentences, with an average 1.08 improvement in precision. 

> 1

https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/03/ bird-circ-scooters-middle-east.html 

> 2

https://misbar.com/en/factcheck/2020/06/18/ are-bird-e-scooters-leaving-the-middle-east 

> 3

https://github.com/Tswings/AVeriTeC-DCE 

2 Related Work 

Claim Extraction Claim extraction is typically framed either as a classification task or claim boundary identification task. The former framing focuses on detecting whether a given sentence con-tains a check-worthy claim. Claimbuster (Hassan et al., 2017b), the most popular method in this paradigm, computes the score of how important a sentence is to be fact-checked. More similar to our work are studies that formulate the task of check-worthy claim detection as a sentence ranking task. For example, Zhou et al. (2021) present a sentence-level classifier by combining a fine-tuned hate-speech model with one dropout layer and one clas-sification layer to rank sentences. However, these methods were not able to handle the challenges of document-level claim extraction, e.g., avoid redun-dant claim sentences. The framing of claim extraction as boundary identification focuses on detecting the exact claim boundary within the sentence. Nakov et al. (2021a) propose a BERT-based model to perform claim de-tection (Levy et al., 2014) by identifying the bound-aries of the claim within the sentence. Sundriyal et al. (2022) tackle claim span identification as a token classification task for identifying argument units of claims in the given text. Unlike the above methods, where the claims are extracted from given sentences, our work aims to extract salient check-worthy claims from documents, thus addressing the limitations of sentence-level methods in extracting salient claim sentences and avoiding redundancy. 11944 Sentence 

Extraction 

Sentence 

Decontextualisation 

Claim 

Sentence 

QA-based 

Context Generation 

Check Worthiness 

Estimation 

Document 

> High-quality Context

Document       

> Candidate Central Sentence
> Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East and shutting down its operations in the majority of the region as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, according to five people familiar with the matter.
> California scooter sharing start-up Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East and shutting down its operations in the majority of the region as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, according to five people familiar with the matter.
> Decontextualised Sentence
> California scooter sharing start-up Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East and shutting down its operations in the majority of the region as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, according to five
> people familiar with the matter.
> Document-level claim
> Step 1: Question Generation
> Q1: Which company is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East?
> Q2: Bird is scrapping how many e-scooters in the Middle East?
> Q3: Why is Bird shutting down its operation in the majority of the region?
> ……
> Step 2: Question Answering
> A1:California scooter sharing start-up Bird .
> A2: thousands.
> A3: coronavirus pandemic.
> ……
> Step3: QA-to-Context
> S1:California scooter sharing start-up Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East.
> S2: Bird is scrapping thousands of e-scooters in the Middle East.
> S3: Bird is shutting down its operation in the majority of the region because of the coronavirus pandemic.
> ……

Figure 2: An overview of our document-level claim extraction framework. Given an input document, we first use extractive summarization to rank all sentences and select summary sentences as central sentences. Then, we describe a QA-based framework to generate a specific high-quality context for important information units in the sentence. Next, we use a seq2seq generation model to decontextualise sentences by enriching them with their corresponding context. Finally, a claim check-worthiness classifier is used to select salient check-worthy claim sentences based on the score that reflects the degree to which sentences belong to the check-worthy claim. 

Decontextualisation Choi et al. (2021) propose two different methods for decontextualisation, based on either a coreference resolution model or a seq2seq generation model. Both methods use the sentences in the paragraph containing the target sentence as context to rewrite it. Newman et al. (2023) utilize an LLM to generate QA pairs for each sentence by designing specific prompts, and then use an LLM with these QA pairs to rewrite each sentence. Sundriyal et al. (2023) propose to combine chain-of-thought and in-context learning for claim normalization. Unlike the above methods, we generate declarative sentences for potentially ambiguous information units in the target sentence based on the whole document, and combine them into context to rewrite the target sentence. 

3 Method 

As illustrated in Figure 2, our proposed document-level claim extraction framework consists of four components: i) Sentence extraction ( §3.1); extracts the sentences related to the central idea of the doc-ument as candidate claim sentences; ii ) Context generation ( §3.2), extracts context from the doc-ument for each candidate sentence; iii ) Sentence decontextualisation ( §3.3), rewrites each sentence with its corresponding context to be understandable out of context; iv ) Check-worthiness estimation (§3.4), selects the final check-worthy claims from candidate decontextualised sentences. 

3.1 Sentence Extraction 

The claims selected by human fact-checkers are typically related to the central idea of the docu-ment considered. Thus we propose to model sen-tence extraction as extractive summarization. For this purpose, we concatenate all the sentences in the document into an input sequence, which is then fed to BertSum (Liu and Lapata, 2019), a document-level extractive summarization method trained on the CNN/DailyMail dataset. Specifi-cally, given a document consisting of n sentences 

D = {s1, s 2, ..., s n}, we first formulate the in-put sequence C as “ [CLS] s1 [SEP] [CLS] s2

[SEP] ... [CLS] sn[SEP] ”, where [CLS] and [SEP] 

denote the start and end token for each sentence, re-spectively, and then feed them into a pre-trained en-coder BERT to obtain the sentence representation s.Finally, a linear layer on sentence representations 11945 S = {s1, ..., si, ..., sn} is used to score sentences. 

S = BERT( C)

score i = σ(W si + b0) (1) where σ is a sigmoid function, si denotes the repre-sentation of the i-th [CLS] token, i.e., the represen-tation of the i-th sentence, and score i denotes the score of the i-th sentence. All sentences are con-structed into an ordered set S = {s′

> 1

, ..., s ′

> i

, ..., s ′

> n

}

according to their scores. Since all sentences are ranked by sentence-level scoring, some top-scoring sentences may have the same or similar meaning. To avoid redundancy, we add an entailment model DocNLI (Yin et al., 2021), a more generalizable model trained on five datasets from different bench-marks, on top of the output of BertSum to remove redundant sentences by calculating the entailment scores between sentences, e.g., we first remove the sentences that have an entailment relationship with the top-1 sentence in S, and then repeat this pro-cess for the remaining top-2/3/... sentence until we extract k central sentences. Following previous work (Liu and Lapata, 2019), we only select the top-k sentences with the highest scores in Equa-tion 1 as candidate central sentences. 

S′ = DocNLI( S) (2) where S′ = {s′

> 1

, s ′

> 2

, ..., s ′

> k

} is a set of central sen-tences that do not contain the same meaning. 

3.2 Context Generation 

After sentence extraction, the next step is to clarify the (possibly) ambiguous sentences in S′ by rewrit-ing them with their necessary context. Unlike Choi et al. (2021) where the context consists of a se-quence of sentences in the paragraph containing the ambiguous sentence, we need to consider the whole document, i.e., sentences from different para-graphs. We propose a QA-based context generation framework to produce a specific context for each ambiguous sentence, which contains three compo-nents: i) Question Generation: extracts potentially ambiguous information units from the sentence and generates questions with them as answers; ii )Question Answering: finds more information about ambiguous information units by answering gener-ated questions with the whole document; iii ) QA-to-Context Generation: converts question-answer pairs into declarative sentences and combines them into context specific to the sentence. In the follow-ing subsections, we describe each component in detail. 

Question Generation. To identify ambiguous in-formation units in candidate central sentences, we first use Spacy 4 to extract named entities, pronouns, nouns, noun phrases, verbs and verb phrases in the sentence i as the potentially ambiguous information units Ui = {u1 

> i

, u 2 

> i

, ..., u ji , ..., u mi }, i ∈ [1 , 2, ..., k ],where uji denotes the j-th information unit of the 

i-th candidate sentence s′

> i

.Once the set of information units for a sentence 

Ui is identified, we then generate a question for each of them. Specifically, we concatenate uji and 

s′ 

> i

in which uji is located as the input sequence and feed it into QG (Murakhovs’ka et al., 2022), a question generator model trained on nine question generation datasets with different types of answers, to produce the question qji with uji as the answer. 

Qi = {qji }mj=1 = {QG( s′

> i

, u ji )}mj=1 (3) where Qi denotes the set of questions correspond-ing to Ui in the sentence s′

> i

.

Question Answering. After question genera-tion, our next step is to clarify ambiguous infor-mation units by answering corresponding ques-tions with the document D. Specifically, fol-lowing Schlichtkrull et al. (2023), we first use BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009) to retrieve evi-dence E related to the question qji from D, and then answer qji with E using an existing QA model (Khashabi et al., 2022) trained on twenty datasets that can answer different types of ques-tions. 

E = BM25( D, q ji )

aji = QA( E, q ji ) (4) where aji denotes a more complete information unit corresponding to uij , e.g., a complete coreference. We denote all question-answer pairs of the i-th sen-tence as Pi = {(q1 

> i

, a 1 

> i

), (q2 

> i

, a 2 

> i

), ..., (qmi , a mi )}.

QA-to-Context Generation. After question an-swering, we utilize a seq2seq generation model to convert QA pairs Pi into the corresponding con-text C′

> i

. Specifically, we first concatenate the ques-tion qji and the answer aji as the input sequence, and then output a sentence using the BART model (Lewis et al., 2019) finetuned on QA2D (Demszky et al., 2018). QA2D is a dataset with over 500k 

> 4https://spacy.io

11946 Data #sample med .sent avg .sent len .claim len .document 

Train 830 9 1.09 17 274 Dev 149 6 1.01 16 120 Test 252 5 1.05 16 63 All 1231 7 1.07 17 17             

> Table 1: Descriptive statistics for AVeriTeC-DCE. # sample refers to the number of samples in AVeriTeC available for claim extraction, i.e., the total number of accessible source url ,med .sent refers to the median number of sentences in documents. avg .sent refers to the average number of sentences in claims, len .claim refers to the median length of claims in words, len .document refers to the median length of documents in words.

NLI examples that contains various inference phe-nomena rarely seen in previous NLI datasets. More formally, 

˜sji = BART( qji , a ji ) (5) where ˜sji is a declarative sentence corresponding to the information unit uji . Finally, all generated sentences are combined into high-quality context 

C′ 

> i

= {˜s1 

> i

, ˜s2 

> i

, ..., ˜smi } corresponding to the infor-mation units Ui in sentence s′

> i

, which is then used in the next decontextualisation step to enrich the ambiguous sentences. 

3.3 Sentence Decontextualisation 

Sentence decontextualisation aims to rewrite sen-tences to be understandable out of context, while retaining their original meaning. To do this, we use a seq2seq generation model T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) to enrich the target sentence with the con-text generated in the previous step for it. Specif-ically, we first formulate the input sequence as “[CLS] ˜ s1 

> i

[SEP] ˜ s2 

> i

...... [SEP] ˜ smi [SEP] s′

> i

”, where s′ 

> i

denotes the potential ambiguous sentence and [SEP] is a separator token between the con-text sentences generated. We then feed the input sequence to D (Choi et al., 2021), a decontextuali-sation model was trained on the dataset annotated by native speakers of English in the U.S. that han-dles various linguistic phenomena, to rewrite the sentence. Similarly, we set the output sequence to be [CAT] [SEP] y.

yi =



D( s′

> i

, C ′

> i

), if CAT = f easible s′ 

> i

, if CAT = inf easible s′ 

> i

, if CAT = unnecessary 

(6) where CAT = f easible or inf easible denotes that s′ 

> i

can or cannot be decontextualised, CAT = 

unnecessary denotes that s′ 

> i

can be understood without being rewritten, yi denotes the i-th decon-textualised sentence. 

3.4 Check-Worthiness Estimation 

Unlike existing CE methods that determine whether a sentence is worth checking without considering the context, we estimate the check-worthiness of a sentence after decontextualisation because some sentences may be transformed from not check-worthy into check-worthy ones in this process. Specifically, we use a DeBERTa model trained on the ClaimBuster dataset (Arslan et al., 2020) to clas-sify sentences into three categories: Check-worthy Factual Sentence (CFS), Unimportant Factual Sen-tence (UFS) and Non-Factual Sentence (NFS). For-mally, 

score (yi) = DeBERTa( class = CFS | yi)claim = argmax {score (yi)}ki=1 

(7) where score (yi) reflects the degree to which the decontextualised sentence yi belongs to CFS, and 

claim denotes that the final salient check-worthy claim that can be understood out of context. 

4 Dataset 

We convert AVeriTeC, a recently proposed dataset for real-world claim extraction and verification (Schlichtkrull et al., 2023), into AVeriTeC-DCE, a dataset for the document-level CE task. AVeriTeC is collected from 50 different fact-checking organi-zations and contains 4568 real-world claims. Each claim is associated with attributes such as its type, source and date. In this work, we mainly focus on the following attributes relevant to claim ex-traction: i) claim , the claim as extracted by the fact-checkers and decontextualised by annotators, and ii ) source url : the URL linking to the original web article of the claim . The task of this work is to extract the salient check-worthy claims from the 

source url . We also consider whether claims need to be decontextualised when extracting them from documents, as this will directly affect the subse-quent evidence retrieval and claim verification. 11947 To extract claim-document pairs from AVeriTeC that can be used for document-level CE, we per-form the following filtering steps: 1) Since we focus on the extraction of textual claims, we do not include source urls containing images, video or audio; 2) To extract the sentences containing the claims from source urls , we build a web scraper to extract text data in the source url as the doc-ument. We found that the attribute source url 

is not always available in samples, thus we only select those samples where the web scraper can return text data from source urls . We obtain a dataset AVeriTeC-DCE, containing 1231 available samples, for document-level CE. We do not divide the dataset into train, dev and test sets, as all mod-els we rely on are pre-trained models ( e.g., Bert-Sum) and approaches that do not require training (e.g., BM25). Statistics for AVeriTeC-DCE are de-scribed in Table 1. 

5 Experiments 

Our approach consists of four components: sen-tence extraction, context generation, sentence de-contextualisation and check-worthiness estimation. As such, we conduct separate experiments to eval-uate them, as well as an overall evaluation for document-level CE. 

5.1 Sentence Extraction 

We compare our sentence extraction method, the combination of BertSum and DocNLI stated in Sec-tion 3.1, against other baselines through automatic evaluation and human evaluation. 

Baselines 1) Lead sentence: the lead (first) sen-tence of most documents is considered to be the most salient, especially in news articles (Narayan et al., 2018); 2) Claimbuster (Hassan et al., 2017b): we use this well-established method to compute the check-worthiness score of each sentence and we rank sentences based on their scores; 3) LSA (Gong and Liu, 2001): a common method of iden-tifying central sentences of the document using the latent semantic analysis technique; 4) TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004): a graph-based ranking method for identifying important sentences in the document; 5) BertSum (Liu and Lapata, 2019): a BERT-based document-level extractive summariza-tion method for ranking sentences. 

Automatic Evaluation Since the central sen-tences of documents are not given in AVeriTeC, Method P@1 P@3 P@5 P@10 Claimbuster 37.8 59.1 65.7 71.4 Lead Sentence 42.3 - - -LSA 38.4 55.3 62.1 70.4 TextRank 42.7 60.6 65.1 71.2 BertSum 43.4 61.6 67.5 72.3 Ours 47.8 63.1 68.6 73.8 

> Table 2: Results with different sentence extraction meth-ods. P@k denotes the probability that the first k sen-tences in the ranked sentences contain the central sen-tence.

Claimbuster Ours IsCheckWorthy 0.36 0.44 IsCentralClaim 0.24 0.68 

> Table 3: Human Evaluation of sentence extraction on two different dimensions.

we cannot evaluate the extracted central sentences by exact matching. Thus, we instead rely on the sentence that has the highest chrF (Popovi´ c, 2015) with the claim , as the claim is the central claim annotated by human fact-checkers. We use Preci-sion@k as the evaluation metric, which denotes the probability that the first k sentences in the ex-tracted sentences contain the central sentence. Ta-ble 2 shows the results of different sentence extrac-tion methods. We can see that our method outper-forms all baselines in identifying the central sen-tence, achieving a P@1/P@3/P@5/P@10 score of 47.8/63.1/68.6/73.8, which indicates that the com-bination of the extractive summarization (BertSum) and entailment model (DocNLI) can better capture the central sentences and avoid redundant ones. We found that the common extractive summariza-tion methods ( e.g., Lead Sentence, TextRank and BertSum) are better than Claimbuster on P@1, con-firming what we had stated in the introduction, that sentence-level CE methods have limitations when they are applied at the document-level CE. More-over, we observe that the lead sentence achieves a P@1 score of 42.3, indicating that there is a cor-relation between the sentences selected for fact-checking and the lead sentence that often served as the summary. We list the source URLs of the samples for claim extraction in Appendix A1. 

Human Evaluation To further compare sen-tences extracted by our method and Claimbuster, 11948 Coreference Resolution    

> Sentence : He has pubicly stated that he sympathized with their cause and even hinted that he would provide them with American resources should they be in need during his 2008 State of the Union address.
> Decontextualised sentence : President Obama has pubicly stated that he sympathized with their cause and even hinted that he would provide them with American resources should they be in need during his 2008 State of the Union address.
> Global Scoping
> Sentence : During the attack , Capitol Police made the request again.
> Decontextualised sentence : During the attack on Washington D.C., Capitol Police made the request again.
> Sentence : The government does not have proper storage facilities for stocking such a large amount of excess grain.
> Decontextualised sentence : The government of India does not have proper storage facilities for stocking such a large amount of excess grain.
> Bridge Anaphora

Figure 3: Case studies of sentence decontextualisation solving linguistic problems, such as coreference resolution, global scoping and bridge anaphora. 

we asked a fact-checking professional to evaluate the quality of extracted sentences on the follow-ing two dimensions: 1) IsCheckWorthy : is the sentence worth checking? 2) IsCentralClaim :is the sentence related to the central idea of the article? We randomly select 50 samples, each con-taining at least 5 sentences. For simplicity, we only select the top-1 sentence returned by each method for comparison. As shown in Table 3, we observed that 68 % of the central sentences extracted by our method are related to the central idea of the doc-ument compared to 24 % of Claimbuster, which further supports our conclusion obtained by auto-matic evaluation, i.e., the sentences extracted by our method were more often central to the doc-ument, and more often check-worthy than those that extracted by Claimbuster. This indicates that when identifying salient check-worthy claims from documents, it is not enough to consider whether a sentence is worth checking at the sentence level, but also whether the sentence is related to the cen-tral idea of the document. Thus, we believe that the claims related to the central idea of the document are the ones that the public is more interested in knowing the truth. 

5.2 Decontextualisation 

To evaluate the effectiveness of decontextualisation on evidence retrieval, for a fair comparison, we select the sentence that has the highest chrF with the claim as the best sentence as we considered in Section 5.1, and conduct a comparison between it and its corresponding decontextualised sentence. The evidence set used for evaluation is retrieved from the Internet using the Google Search API given a claim, each containing gold evidence and additional distractors (Schlichtkrull et al., 2023). We use Precision@k as the evaluation metric. 

Baselines 1) Coreference model: decontextuali-sation by replacing unresolved coreferences in the target sentence, e.g., (Joshi et al., 2020); 2) Seq2seq model: decontextualisation by rewriting the target sentence with necessary context (Choi et al., 2021). 

Retrieval-based Evaluation For a given claim different decontextualisations could be considered correct, thus comparing against the single reference in AVeriTeC would be suboptimal. Thus we prefer to conduct the retrieval-based evaluation, assum-ing that better decontextualisation improves evi-dence retrieval, as it should provide useful context for fact-checking. Following previous work (Choi et al., 2021), we compare our QA-based decontex-tualisation method against other baselines through retrieval-based evaluation. We use BM25 as the retriever to find evidence with different sentences as the query. Table 4 shows the results for evidence retrieval with different decontextualised sentences on the dev set of AVeriTeC-DCE (AVeriTeC only publicly released the train and dev sets). We found that our method outperforms all baselines, and im-proves the P@3/P@5/P@10 score over the original sentence by 1.42/0.82/0.99, achieving an average 1.08 improvement in precision. After further anal-ysis, we found that only 21/149 sentences are de-contextualised by our method, and 17/21 of these sentences obtain better evidence retrieval, with an average improvement of 1.21 in precision over the original sentences, proving that decontextualisation enables evidence retrieval more effectively. 

Case Study Figure 3 illustrates three case stud-ies of sentence decontextualisation. The first case is an example that requires coreference resolution. To make the sentence understandable out of con-text, these words ( e.g., “He ”, “ their ”) need to be rewritten with the context. After decontextualisa-11949 Method P@3 P@5 P@10 Sentence 35.45 44.72 61.31 Coreference 36.02 44.98 61.79 Seq2seq(Context) 36.17 45.04 61.99 Ours seq2seq(Context ⋆) 36.87 45.54 62.30  

> Table 4: Results for evidence retrieval with different decontextualised sentences. Context consists of a se-quence of sentences in the paragraph containing the target sentence. Context ⋆consists of declarative sen-tences generated by our context generation module.

tion, we can see that “ He ” is rewritten to “ President Obama ”, which helps us understand the sentence better without context. As for “ their ”, we cannot decontextualise it because there is no information about this word in the document. This supports the claim that providing a high-quality context is necessary for better decontextualisation. The sec-ond case is an example that requires global scoping, which requires adding a phrase ( e.g., prepositional phrase) to the entire sentence to make it better un-derstood. In this case, we add “ on Washington D.C. ”as a modifier to “ During the attack ” to help us un-derstand where the attack took place. The third case is an example that requires a bridge anaphora, where the phrase noun “ The government ” becomes clear by adding a modifier “ India ”. In summary, decontextualising the claim is helpful for humans to better understand the claim without context. 

5.3 Document-level Claim Extraction 

In this section, we put four components together to conduct an overall evaluation for document-level CE, e.g., extracting the claim in green from the doc-ument in Figure 1. We first select top-3 sentences returned by different sentence extraction methods as candidate central sentences, and then feed them into our decontextualisation model to obtain de-contextualised claim sentences, finally use a claim check-worthiness classifier to select the final claim. We evaluate performance by calculating the sim-ilarity between our final decontextualised claim sentence and the claim decontextualised by fact-checkers. We use the chrF as the evaluation metric. The chrF computes the similarity between texts us-ing the character n-gram F-score. Other metrics are reported in Appendix A2. Statistics for decontextualisation are described in Table 5, we observe that 122 out of 1231 (10 %)sentences can be decontextualised (feasible); 122 Data #claim #fea . #infea . #unnec .

All 1231 122 122 987  

> Table 5: Statistic of decontextualisation. # fea ./ infea .
> denotes the number of sentences that can/cannot be decontextualised, # unnec .denotes the number of sen-tences that can be understood without context.

Method chrF Sentence ⋆ Dec. Sentence ⋆

Claimbuster 24.3 24.5 Lead Sentence 23.8 -LSA 24.1 24.3 TextRank 24.5 25.4 BertSum 25.6 25.9 Ours 25.9 26.4   

> Table 6: Results of Document-level CE. Sentence ⋆de-notes the best sentence returned by different sentence extraction methods. Dec. Sentence ⋆denotes the decon-textualised Sentence ⋆.

out of 1231 (10 %) sentences cannot be decontex-tualised (infeasible); and 987 out of 1231 (80 %)sentences can be understood without being decon-textualised (unnecessary), including the lead sen-tence. Since the lead sentence of the document is often considered to be the most salient, we do not decontextualise the lead sentence. In Table 6, we show the results of original sentences and decon-textualised sentences for claim extraction, and our method achieves a chrF of 26.4 on gold claims de-contextualised by the fact-checkers, outperforming all baselines. We observe that the performance of claim extraction and sentence extraction is posi-tively correlated, i.e., the closer the extracted sen-tence is to the central sentence, the more similar the extracted claim is to the claim , which supports our assumption that salient claims are derived from central sentences. For this reason, the performance of our document-level CE is limited by the perfor-mance of sentence extraction, i.e., if our sentence extraction method cannot find the gold central sen-tence, decontextualisation may not improve the per-formance of CE, and may even lead to a decrease in the performance of CE due to noise caused by decontextualisation. Moreover, empirically, we found that central sen-tences led to improved overall performance. This might be a consequence of the dataset – social me-dia sites such as Twitter or Facebook are common 11950 sources of claims in AVeriTeC (along with more traditional news), and a Twitter or Facebook thread often contains only a few key points. AVeriTeC was collected by reverse engineering claims which fact-checkers from around the world chose to work on. As such, the distribution of source articles rep-resents what journalists found to be check-worthy and chose to work on. Our work as such reflects the contexts wherein real-world misinformation ap-pears (but indeed, may have a bias towards what works well in those contexts). To further verify the effectiveness of our method, we conduct a comparison on the document-level CE dataset (CLEF-2021, subtask 1B (Shaar et al., 2021)) using our method and Claimbuster. Table 7 shows the results of two different methods for identifying check-worthy claims on the dev set of subtask 1B. We observe that our method outper-forms Claimbuster on P@1/3/5/10, indicating that our document-level CE method can better identify check-worthy claims than Claimbuster (sentence-level CE). This supports our conclusion that the document-level check-worthy claims extracted by our method are the claims that the public is more interested in knowing the truth. Method P@1 P@3 P@5 P@10 Claimbuster 0.111 0.074 0.156 0.089 Ours 0.222 0.185 0.200 0.144 

> Table 7: Results of different methods for identifying check-worthy claims on the dev set of subtask 1B.

6 Conclusions and Future work 

This paper presented a document-level claim extrac-tion framework for fact-checking, aiming to extract salient check-worthy claims from documents that can be understood out of context. To extract salient claims from documents, we recast the claim ex-traction task as the extractive summarization task to select candidate claim sentences. To make sen-tences understandable out of context, we introduce a QA-based decontextualisation model to enrich them with the necessary context. The experimental results show the superiority of our method over previous methods, including document-level claim extraction and evidence retrieval, as indicated by human evaluation and automatic evaluation. In fu-ture work, we plan to extend our document-level claim extraction method to extract salient check-worthy claims from multimodal web articles. 

Acknowledgements 

This project has received funding from the Euro-pean Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation programme grant AVeriTeC (Grant agreement No. 865958). We thank David Corney from Full Fact for his help with evaluating the output of our models, and Yu-long Chen for his helpful comments and discus-sions. We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful questions and comments that helped us improve the paper. 

Limitations 

While our method has demonstrated superiority in extracting salient check-worthy claims and im-proving evidence retrieval, we recognize that our method is not able to decontextualise all ambigu-ous sentences, particularly those that lack the nec-essary context in the source url . Also, human fact-checkers have different missions, thus check-worthiness claims to one fact-checking organiza-tion may not be check-worthiness to another or-ganization ( i.e., some organizations check parody claims or claims from satire websites, while oth-ers do not). Furthermore, since the documents we use are extracted from the source url , a powerful web scraper is required when pulling documents from source urls . Moreover, our method assumes salient claims are derived from central sentences. Although this assumption is true in most cases, it may be inconsistent with central claims collected by human fact-checkers. Besides, we use the chrF metric to calculate the similarity between claims extracted from the source url and the gold claim, while gold claims are decontextualised by the fact-checkers with fact-checking articles and may con-tain information that is not in the original article, thus the metrics used to evaluate document-level claims are worth further exploring. 

Ethics Statement 

We rely on fact-checks from real-world fact-checkers to develop and evaluate our models. Nev-ertheless, as any dataset, it is possible that it con-tains biases which influenced the development of our approach. Given the societal importance of fact-checking, we advise that any automated system is employed with human oversight to ensure that the fact-checkers fact-check appropriate claims. 11951 References 

Fatma Arslan, Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne. 2020. A benchmark dataset of check-worthy factual claims. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media ,volume 14, pages 821–829. Eunsol Choi, Jennimaria Palomaki, Matthew Lamm, Tom Kwiatkowski, Dipanjan Das, and Michael Collins. 2021. Decontextualization: Making sen-tences stand-alone. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 9:447–461. Dorottya Demszky, Kelvin Guu, and Percy Liang. 2018. Transforming question answering datasets into nat-ural language inference datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02922 .Yihong Gong and Xin Liu. 2001. Generic text summa-rization using relevance measure and latent semantic analysis. In Proceedings of the 24th annual inter-national ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval , pages 19–25. Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vla-chos. 2022. A survey on automated fact-checking. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:178–206. Naeemul Hassan, Fatma Arslan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne. 2017a. Toward automated fact-checking: Detecting check-worthy factual claims by claim-buster. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 1803–1812. Naeemul Hassan, Gensheng Zhang, Fatma Arslan, Jo-sue Caraballo, Damian Jimenez, Siddhant Gawsane, Shohedul Hasan, Minumol Joseph, Aaditya Kulkarni, Anil Kumar Nayak, et al. 2017b. Claimbuster: The first-ever end-to-end fact-checking system. Proceed-ings of the VLDB Endowment , 10(12):1945–1948. Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2020. Spanbert: Improving pre-training by representing and predict-ing spans. Transactions of the association for com-putational linguistics , 8:64–77. Daniel Khashabi, Yeganeh Kordi, and Hannaneh Ha-jishirzi. 2022. Unifiedqa-v2: Stronger generalization via broader cross-format training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12359 .Lev Konstantinovskiy, Oliver Price, Mevan Babakar, and Arkaitz Zubiaga. 2021. Toward automated factchecking: Developing an annotation schema and benchmark for consistent automated claim detection. 

Digital threats: research and practice , 2(2):1–16. Ran Levy, Yonatan Bilu, Daniel Hershcovich, Ehud Aharoni, and Noam Slonim. 2014. Context depen-dent claim detection. In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International Conference on Compu-tational Linguistics: Technical Papers , pages 1489– 1500. Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. Bart: De-noising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461 .Marco Lippi and Paolo Torroni. 2015. Context-independent claim detection for argument mining. In IJCAI .Yang Liu and Mirella Lapata. 2019. Text summa-rization with pretrained encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08345 .Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. Textrank: Bring-ing order into text. In Proceedings of the 2004 con-ference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 404–411. Lidiya Murakhovs’ka, Chien-Sheng Wu, Philippe La-ban, Tong Niu, Wenhao Liu, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. MixQG: Neural question generation with mixed answer types. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022 , pages 1486–1497, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Preslav Nakov, David Corney, Maram Hasanain, Firoj Alam, Tamer Elsayed, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Paolo Papotti, Shaden Shaar, and Giovanni Da San Martino. 2021a. Automated fact-checking for assisting human fact-checkers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07769 .Preslav Nakov, Giovanni Da San Martino, Tamer Elsayed, Alberto Barrón-Cedeno, Rubén Míguez, Shaden Shaar, Firoj Alam, Fatima Haouari, Maram Hasanain, Nikolay Babulkov, et al. 2021b. The clef-2021 checkthat! lab on detecting check-worthy claims, previously fact-checked claims, and fake news. In ECIR 2021, Virtual Event, March 28–April 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part II 43 , pages 639–649. Springer. Shashi Narayan, Shay B Cohen, and Mirella Lap-ata. 2018. Don’t give me the details, just the summary! topic-aware convolutional neural net-works for extreme summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08745 .Benjamin Newman, Luca Soldaini, Raymond Fok, Ar-man Cohan, and Kyle Lo. 2023. A controllable qa-based framework for decontextualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14772 .Maja Popovi´ c. 2015. chrf: character n-gram f-score for automatic mt evaluation. In Proceedings of the tenth workshop on statistical machine translation , pages 392–395. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-former. The Journal of Machine Learning Research ,21(1):5485–5551. 11952 Revanth Gangi Reddy, Sai Chinthakindi, Zhenhailong Wang, Yi R Fung, Kathryn S Conger, Ahmed S El-sayed, Martha Palmer, and Heng Ji. 2021. News-claims: A new benchmark for claim detection from news with background knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08544 .Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-yond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Re-trieval , 3(4):333–389. Michael Schlichtkrull, Zhijiang Guo, and Andreas Vla-chos. 2023. Averitec: A dataset for real-world claim verification with evidence from the web. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13117 .Shaden Shaar, Maram Hasanain, Bayan Hamdan, Zien Sheikh Ali, Fatima Haouari, Alex Nikolov, Müc-ahid Kutlu, Yavuz Selim Kartal, Firoj Alam, Gio-vanni Da San Martino, et al. 2021. Overview of the clef-2021 checkthat! lab task 1 on check-worthiness estimation in tweets and political debates. In CLEF (working notes) , pages 369–392. Megha Sundriyal, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Preslav Nakov. 2023. From chaos to clarity: Claim normal-ization to empower fact-checking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14338 .Megha Sundriyal, Atharva Kulkarni, Vaibhav Pulastya, Md. Shad Akhtar, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2022. Empowering the fact-checkers! automatic identifi-cation of claim spans on Twitter. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 7701–7715, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Amelie Wührl and Roman Klinger. 2021. Claim de-tection in biomedical twitter posts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.11639 .Wei Xu, Courtney Napoles, Ellie Pavlick, Quanze Chen, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2016. Optimizing sta-tistical machine translation for text simplification. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 4:401–415. Wenpeng Yin, Dragomir Radev, and Caiming Xiong. 2021. Docnli: A large-scale dataset for document-level natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09449 .Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Eval-uating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 .Xinrui Zhou, Bohuai Wu, and Pascale Fung. 2021. Fight for 4230 at checkthat! 2021: Domain-specific preprocessing and pretrained model for ranking claims by check-worthiness. In CLEF (Working Notes) , pages 681–692. 

A1 Statistic of Source URLs 

We described the statistic of the source URLs of the samples for document-level CE in Table A1.                                  

> URL #sample
> twitter.com 241 facebook.com 235 perma.cc 63 channelstv.com 37 aljazeera.com 34 president.go.ke 27 gov.za 25 instagram.com 18 c-span.org 16 factba.se 13 axios.com 12 youtu.be 12 rumble.com 12 abcnews.go.com 11 rev.com 11 cnn.com 10 news24.com 10 punchng.com 10 washingtonpost.com 10 cbsnews.com 8foxnews.com 8misbar.com 7thegatewaypundit.com 7politifact.com 7nypost.com 7nbcnews.com 7telegraph.co.uk 7wisn.com 6tatersgonnatate.com 6bustatroll.org 6dailymail.co.uk 5whitehouse.gov 5

Table A1: Statistic of the source URLs of the samples for document-level CE. We only list URLs with a total number number greater than 5. 

A2 Evaluation Metrics 

We use the following metrics to assess the similarity between the claim decontextualised by our method and the claim decontextualised by fact-checkers. 

SARI (Xu et al., 2016) is developed to compare the claim with the reference claim by measuring the goodness of words that are added, deleted and kept. BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) is uti-lized to compute the semantic overlap between the claim and the reference claim by sentence repre-sentation. Since most claims in AVerTeC are de-contextualised by fact-checkers with fact-checking articles, they may contain some information that is not in the source url , making it challenging for SARI and BERTScore to be used as evaluation met-rics in this task. Thus, we use the chrF as our main evaluation metric for claim extraction. 11953 Method Sentence ⋆ Dec. Sentence ⋆

SARI BERTScore chrF SARI BERTScore chrF Claimbuster 6.23 82.7 24.3 6.24 82.8 24.5 Lead Sentence 6.41 83.4 23.8 - - -LSA 5.56 83.2 24.1 5.57 83.2 24.3 TextRank 6.60 83.1 24.5 6.61 83.1 25.4 BertSum 6.54 83.6 25.6 6.55 83.6 25.9 Ours 6.56 83.7 25.9 6.70 83.8 26.4  

> Table A2: Results of Document-level CE on three different metrics.

A3 Implementation Details 

All models we use in this paper are pre-trained models ( e.g., BertSum) or approaches that do not require training ( e.g., BM25). The hyperparameters of each model can be found in the original paper. To help readers reproduce our method, we have released our code on GitHub 5.

A4 ChatGPT for Decontextualisation 

To verify how well ChatGPT would do on decon-textualisation, we use ChatGPT to decontextualise three claim sentences in Figure 3. The ChatGPT prompt for decontextualisation is as follows: ChatGPT Prompt Claim: [claim] Context: [context] To rewrite the Claim to be understandable out of context based on the Context, while retaining its original meaning. Decontextualised sentences produced by ChatGPT: 

• Sentence 1: Barack Obama publicly ex-pressed sympathy for ISIS and hinted at providing them with American resources during his 2008 State of the Union address. 

• Sentence 2: During a specific event, there was a delay in obtaining approval from a certain authority for assistance requested by the Capitol Police. 

• Sentence 3: The Indian government lacks adequate storage facilities for managing the large surplus of grain it possesses. 

> 5https://github.com/Tswings/AVeriTeC-DCE

From the results, we can see that ChatGPT can produce well-formed claims that can be understood out of context, but it tends to rephrase the claim. In AVeriTeC (Appendix J.3.1), the decontextualised claims are required to be as close as possible to their original form. Our method tends not to change the original claims, but to rewrite only the ambigu-ous information units in claims, thus our generated claims are closer to the claims decontextualised by annotators than ChatGPT. 11954