Title: 2025.emnlp-main.972.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.972.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 03 Jan 2026 16:57:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 19254–19285 November 4-9, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics Multi-Document Event Extraction Using Large and Small Language Models 

Qingkai Min 1,2 , Zitian Qu 3, Qipeng Guo 4, Xiangkun Hu 5, Zheng Zhang 6, and Yue Zhang 2*

1 Zhejiang University 2 School of Engineering, Westlake University 

3 Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai AI Lab 5 Fudan University 6 NYU Shanghai 

{minqingkai, zhangyue}@westlake.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Multi-document event extraction aims to ag-gregate event information from diverse sources for a comprehensive understanding of complex events. Despite its practical significance, this task has received limited attention in existing research. The inherent challenges include han-dling complex reasoning over long contexts and intricate event structures. In this paper, we propose a novel collaborative framework that integrates large language models for multi-step reasoning and fine-tuned small language mod-els to handle key subtasks, guiding the overall reasoning process. We introduce a new bench-mark for multi-document event extraction and propose an evaluation metric designed for com-prehensive assessment of multiple aggregated events. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms existing methods, providing new insights into collabo-rative reasoning to tackle the complexities of multi-document event extraction. 1

1 Introduction 

Event extraction refers to the process of identify-ing and structuring event-related information from unstructured text. This involves detecting specific triggers, participants, and associated temporal and spatial attributes, thereby converting free-form text into structured data (Li et al., 2013). Event extrac-tion supports downstream tasks like summarization, knowledge base construction, and question answer-ing. The task has evolved from focusing on events within individual sentences to handling events at the document level (Yang et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). This shift breaks sentence boundaries to collect information across multiple parts of a document, enabling more comprehensive and coherent event representations. 

> *

Corresponding author 

> 1

The code and dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/taolusi/MEET. Doc3                                    

> A strong earthquake struck Indonesia's Aceh province on Tuesday at 07:37a.m.UTC… and dozens of villagers were injured .
> D-Event2
> Trigger injured
> Time on Tuesday
> Location1 Indonesia’s Aceh province
> Location2 western tip of Sumatra island
> Human more than 200
> Non-human
> quake
> D-Event1
> Trigger injuring
> Time early Tuesday
> Location the northern
> Indonesian
> province of Aceh
> Human dozens
> Non-human
> 6 . 1 -magnitude
> earthquake
> D-Event3
> Trigger injuring
> Time on Tuesday at
> 07:37a.m.UTC
> Human dozens of
> villagers
> Non-human
> earthquake
> M-Event1
> Trigger injured
> Time1 on Tuesday
> Time2 on Tuesday at 07:37a.m.UTC(3:3 7a.m.EDT)
> Location1 in Indonesia’s Aceh province
> Location2 western tip of Sumatra island
> Human1 dozens of villagers
> Human2 more than 200
> Non-human
> 6.1-magnitude quake
> A powerful 6 . 1 -
> magnitude earthquake
> strikes the northern
> Indonesian province of
> Aceh early Tuesday ,
> killing at least three
> people and injuring
> dozens more across the
> affected region .
> Doc1
> Officials say …and
> more than 200 injured
> by the quake , which
> struck the western tip
> of Sumatra island in Indonesia’s Aceh province on Tuesday .
> Doc2

Figure 1: An example of multi-document event extrac-tion, showing how injury-related information is aggre-gated from multiple sources, with overlapping argu-ments highlighted in the same color. 

In real-world scenarios, users typically acquire information from multiple documents originating from different sources. This multi-document per-spective is critical because different documents may provide unique, yet essential, details that com-plement each other to offer a more complete picture of an event. As shown in Figure 1, the three docu-ments discuss the same earthquake, with Document 3 providing a more specific timestamp—“ 07:37 a.m. UTC ”—compared to the other two. Mean-while, Document 2 provides the exact number of injured individuals, stating “ more than 200 ”. These varying details demonstrate how information from different sources can come together to offer a more comprehensive understanding of the event. Despite its practical significance, multi-document event extraction remains an underex-plored area of research (Ji and Grishman, 2008; 

19254 Ji et al., 2009; Gao et al., 2024). Compared to document-level event extraction, this task presents considerable challenges, primarily due to the longer input contexts, increased inconsistencies in expression, terminology, and detail introduced by multiple documents, as well as the higher volume of events, which complicates the coref-erence aggregation process. At the core of these challenges is the high demand placed on models’ reasoning capabilities, as they must integrate and align information across a large, complex space. We tackle the challenges of multi-document event extraction by introducing ECB++, a new benchmark dataset built on ECB+ corpus (Cybul-ska and Vossen, 2014), which provides separate an-notations for cross-document entity and event coref-erence. To facilitate the consolidation of event-specific information, ECB++ augments the dataset with fine-grained, document-level argument anno-tations. Notably, for events mentioned across mul-tiple sources in ECB++, arguments extracted from a single document account for only 53.4% of the total on average. To address the new evaluation challenge of matching multiple events, we propose CEAF-MEE, a novel metric that extends existing document-level event extraction metrics, which typ-ically focus on single-event evaluation. It aligns predicted and reference event structures at both the event and argument levels through maximum bipartite matching. Multi-document event extraction challenges for both small language model (SLM) supervised fine-tuning pipeline 2 and large language model (LLM) sequence-to-sequence generation. SLM pipeline suffers from error propagation across subtasks; for example, document-level argument extraction has an F1 score below 70%, and cross-document event coreference resolution remains below 80%. Sequence-to-sequence LLMs, on the other hand, often lack explicit rationales, which affects both performance and interpretability (Wei et al., 2022). This is further complicated by the nature of our task, which requires reasoning across potentially hundreds of events spread across documents, re-sulting in long and intricate chains of aggregation that cannot be easily captured in a single sequence. We provide illustrative examples in Appendix A. Recent work has increasingly explored LLMs for information extraction tasks, often combining their 

> 2In this work, SLM refers to smaller pre-trained language models, like BERT and RoBERTa, which are more cost-effective for fine-tuning on specific tasks.

general abilities with the task-specific adaptabil-ity of SLMs (Wan et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Min et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024). Following this line, we propose a collab-orative framework that leverages the complemen-tary strengths of LLMs and SLMs: a pipeline of fine-tuned SLMs handle core subtasks and provide structured intermediate outputs, while LLM agents perform multi-step reasoning with a holistic under-standing of these outputs and the global context. Specifically, our framework consists of two pri-mary reasoning stages. In the event composition 

stage, the system creates cross-document clusters by aligning events and their associated arguments. This stage is formulated as a heuristic search over a large combinatorial space, where an LLM agent incrementally performs the composition by inte-grating SLM-generated structures with a broader contextual understanding. In the subsequent event consolidation stage, a separate LLM agent itera-tively conducts cluster-level reasoning to consoli-date each cluster into a single, coherent event rep-resentation—selecting a representative trigger and resolving redundant, or irrelevant arguments. Experimental results show that our collaborative framework significantly outperforms both pipeline-based methods and LLM sequence-to-sequence ap-proaches. Analysis reveals that our model excels at resolving both event coreference and argument con-solidation, highlighting its effectiveness in tackling the complex reasoning demands of the task. The relatively modest scores underscore the inherent complexity and challenges of the task. To our knowledge, this is the first work to in-tegrate the large and small language models for multi-step reasoning in event extraction. We hope our framework and benchmark will support further progress in information extraction research. 

2 Task and Benchmark 

2.1 Terminology and Task Definition Key Event Concepts 

Event Trigger: A word or phrase in the text that signals the occurrence of an event, e.g., injuring 

and injured in Figure 1. 

Event Argument: An entity or event fulfilling a specific semantic role, such as time, location, or participants (human or non-human). To support nested structures, events can also serve as argu-ments of other events—for example, in Figure 1, 

quake is the non-human agent of the injured event. 19255 Document-Level Event: A structured event table from a single document, consisting of a trigger and several arguments. This is illustrated by D-Event1 ,

D-Event2 , and D-Event3 in Figure 1. 

Multi-Document Event: A structured table com-bining event data from multiple documents about the same occurrence, unifying diverse triggers and overlapping arguments into a canonical form. This is illustrated by M-Event1 in Figure 1. 

Task Definition 

Input: A set of documents D = {d1, d 2, . . . , d n},possibly thematically related. 

Output: A set of multi-document events ˆE =

{ˆe1, ˆe2, . . . , ˆem}, where each event ˆei = (ˆ ti, ˆAi)

consists of a canonical trigger ˆti and a set of argu-ments ˆAi = {ˆai, 1, ˆai, 2, . . . , ˆai,k i }.

2.2 Benchmark Dataset ECB++ Dataset Creation We build our dataset upon the Event Coreference Bank Plus (ECB+) (Cybulska and Vossen, 2014), a widely-used public bench-mark for cross-document event and entity corefer-ence resolution. ECB+ provides event triggers, en-tity mentions, and both event and entity coreference chains. To enable event argument consolidation, we extend ECB+ by annotating event arguments at document level, resulting in structured events. By integrating these document-level events with the original cross-document event and entity corefer-ence chains, we create ECB++ , a comprehensive multi-document event representation. We adopt FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) as the guiding schema for annotating event arguments. FrameNet is a lexical resource that defines seman-tic roles for participants in various event types, en-suring both consistent and semantically precise an-notation of event arguments. Following Li et al. (2021), the annotation was first performed by three linguistics students and subsequently reviewed by an instructor to ensure high-quality output. The Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) reached 83.4%, confirming the quality of the dataset. The annota-tion guidelines can be found in Appendix B.1. 

Dataset Analysis The ECB++ dataset consists of 982 news articles spanning 43 topics, such as earth-quakes, criminal cases, and corporate acquisitions. Each topic contains 23–25 documents, with an av-erage of 60 events per topic. Notably, one-quarter of the events are mentioned in at least three docu-ments, highlighting the need for both event aggre-gation and the ability to handle event-dense scenar-Dataset Split Train Dev Test # Topics 25 8 10 Avg. # Docs per Topic 23.0 24.5 20.6 Avg. # Events per Topic (M/S) 16.44/44.6 16.1/35.0 18.2/62.3 Avg. # Docs per Event (M/S) 3.7/1 4.6/1 3.4/1 Avg. # Args per Event (M/S) 4.2/2.4 4.0/2.2 3.7/2.1 

Table 1: Dataset statistics. “M/S” denotes values for events mentioned in multiple vs. single documents. 

Figure 2: Distribution of single-document arguments (annotated) and multi-document arguments (aggregated) per event by number of documents mentioning the event. 

ios. 3 Each topic is divided into two subtopics, each focusing on a distinct yet related seminal event. This design allows documents from both subtopics to be presented together as input, facilitating event aggregation across documents in realistic and com-plex conditions. More detailed statistics are shown in Table 1. We further examine the importance of event con-solidation by comparing the number of arguments in single-document settings with those in multi-document settings, as shown in Figure 2. As more documents mention the same event, the proportion of arguments derived from multi-document aggre-gation increases, emphasizing the need for event ag-gregation. We also conduct a quantitative analysis of argument distribution across documents, reveal-ing considerable redundancy in events mentioned in multiple documents. While 1,230 arguments (≈40%) appear in only a single document, the ma-jority—1,866 arguments ( ≈60%)—are mentioned in two or more documents (e.g., 632 in 2 docs, 350 in 3, 222 in 4, etc.), further emphasizing the need for advanced aggregation techniques, rather than simple merging. Detailed statistics are in provided Table 6 in Appendix B.2. 

> 3Events mentioned in a single document are more frequent than in multiple documents due to ECB+’s original annota-tions. This pattern reflects the inherent nature of news report-ing, where each article typically contains unique content.

19256 2.3 Evaluation Metric 

Multi-document event extraction poses a unique challenge: unlike document-level tasks, which typ-ically evaluate a single event, our task requires matching multiple events. We propose CEAF-MEE , a metric specifically designed for multi-event evaluation. CEAF-MEE is inspired by CEAF-REE and its variants (Du et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023), developed to evaluate argument alignment within individual events. CEAF-MEE tackles the multi-event matching problem using a two-level bipartite matching. At the first level, predicted events are aligned with reference events. For predicted events p ∈ P and reference events r ∈ R , CEAF-MEE finds a one-to-one alignment g∗ that maximizes the sum of similarity scores ϕ(p, r ) across all matched event pairs. The similarity function ϕ measures the match quality of an event pair by averaging trigger and argument scores. The trigger score quantifies the span overlap of the two event triggers. The argu-ment score is computed via a second-level bipartite matching over multiple arguments, where the edge weights correspond to the span overlap between predicted and reference arguments. The final argu-ment score is obtained by averaging the scores of matched argument pairs. Given the optimal alignment g∗, precision and recall are computed as: Precision =

∑ 

> (p,r )∈g∗

ϕ(p, r )

∑ 

> p∈P

ϕ(p, p ) ,

Recall =

∑ 

> (p,r )∈g∗

ϕ(p, r )

∑ 

> r∈R

ϕ(r, r ) .

3 Method 

We first introduce the key sub-tasks and their pipeline organization (Section 3.1), followed by the SLM- and LLM-based implementations (Sec-tion 3.2). We then explore LLM sequence-to-sequence approaches (Section 3.3), and finally present a collaborative framework integrating LLM reasoning with SLM specialization (Section 3.4). 

3.1 Task Decomposition and Pipeline Design 

We design a modular pipeline that builds upon the standard event extraction task and extends it to better suit the multi-document setting. 

1. Event Trigger Detection 

Input: A document di ∈ D .

Output: A set of triggers Ti =

{ti, 1, t i, 2, . . . , t i,p i }, each ti,j is a text span. 

2. Cross-Document Event Coreference Resolu-tion 

Input: The complete set of event triggers T =

{t1, t 2, . . . , t p} extracted from all documents. 

Output: A set of event clusters CT =

{CT, 1, C T, 2, . . . , C T,m }, each cluster CT,k con-tains triggers referring to the same real-world event. 

3. Document-Level Event Argument Extraction 

Input: A document di ∈ D and its corresponding triggers Ti = {ti, 1, . . . , t i,p i }.

Output: A set of document-level events Edi =

{ei, 1, . . . , e i,p i }, where each event ei,j =(ti,j , A i,j ) consists of a trigger ti,j ∈ Tdi and its associated arguments Ai,j = {ai,j, 1, a i,j, 2, . . . }.

4. Cross-Document Argument Coreference Reso-lution 

Input: The full set of event arguments A =⋃ 

> i,j

Ai,j extracted from all documents in D.

Output: A set of argument clusters CA =

{CA 

> 1

, C A 

> 2

, . . . , C Al }, each cluster CAk contains ar-guments referring to the same real-world referent. 

5. Event Canonicalization 

Input: A set of event clusters CT and a set of ar-gument clusters CA.

Output: A set of multi-document events ˆE =

{ˆe1, ˆe2, . . . , ˆem}, where each event ˆei = (ˆ ti, ˆAi)

consists of a canonical trigger ˆti representing clus-ter CT,i , and a set of canonical arguments ˆAi aggre-gated from the relevant argument clusters in CA.The overall structure can be summarized as: 4

D → Td →

{ CT

Ed = ( t, A ) → CA

→ ˆE

3.2 Pipeline Approaches SLM SFT-based Pipeline We build a modular pipeline using state-of-the-art SLMs, each fine-tuned for a specific subtask. Document-level mod-ules operate on individual documents, while cross-document modules process concatenated document pairs. Event canonicalization, which requires inte-grating information across multiple documents and exceeds SLM input limits, is approximated with a frequency-based heuristic that selects the most common surface form for triggers and arguments. Model architectures are detailed in Appendix C.1. 

> 4The presented pipeline is one reasonable task flow, though alternative orders may be valid.

19257 Sub-step 2 Sub-step 1  Sub-step 1             

> LLM Reasoning Stage II: Event Consolidation
> Event
> Coreference Resolution
> SLM-based Pipeline
> Trigger Detection
> Argument
> Extraction
> Argument Coreference Resolution
> Event-to-cluster assignment
> LLM Reasoning Stage I: Event Composition
> Argument alignment
> Step i-1
> Trigger selection
> Argument consolidation
> D-Event1 D-Event2 D-Event4 D-Event5 D-Event3 D-Event1 D-Event2 D-Event4 D-Event5 D-Event3 M-Event2 M-Event2
> M-Event1
> Step i Step i+1 Step i-1
> Sub-step 2
> Step i Step i+1

Figure 3: Our collaborative framework. D-Event denotes document-level events, and M-Event denotes aggregated multi-document events. In each event table, – represents the trigger; other icons represent arguments. Icons with the same shape indicate the same role, while those with the same color refer to the same underlying referent. 

LLM ICL-based Pipeline In parallel, we im-plement a pipeline variant that replaces fine-tuned SLM modules with large language models driven via in-context learning. Each subtask is handled by a dedicated prompt, avoiding the substantial com-putational cost that would be required to fine-tune the large models. Prompting details are provided in Appendix C.2. 

3.3 LLM Sequence-to-Sequence Generation 

Unlike the modular pipeline above, this approach treats multi-document event extraction as a direct sequence-to-sequence generation task. It bypasses intermediate steps such as trigger detection, argu-ment extraction, and coreference resolution, rely-ing on the LLM to produce final event outputs di-rectly. We explore two variants: in-context learn-ing (ICL) , where the model is prompted with in-structions and a few examples, and supervised fine-tuning (SFT) , where the model is trained with instructions and labeled data. Both variants gener-ate canonicalized events without requiring explicit intermediate processing. Prompting details are pro-vided in Appendix C.3. 

3.4 Collaborative Framework with LLM Reasoning 

Our framework, as illustrated in Figure 3, starts with a fine-tuned SLM-based pipeline that gener-ates initial event clusters—each corresponding to multiple document-level events—and their associ-ated argument clusters. This is followed by two primary LLM-driven reasoning stages: event com-position and event consolidation. 

3.4.1 Reasoning Stage I: Event Composition 

In the first reasoning stage, an LLM agent conducts a multi-step heuristic search over possible event compositions, jointly clustering document-level events and aligning their arguments. Guided by the initial clusters from the SLM pipeline and the global context, the agent iterates over all document-level events e ∈ ⋃ 

> d∈D

Ed, assigning each event to an event cluster C′ 

> T

and simultaneously iterating over its associated arguments to update the corre-sponding argument clusters C′

> A

.

Event-to-cluster assignment For each event e,the LLM evaluates its compatibility with each candidate event cluster C′ 

> i

∈ C′ 

> T

, where C′ 

> i

⊆⋃ 

> d∈D

Ed contains multiple document-level events. The LLM assigns a discrete relevance score si ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to reflect contextual alignment, trig-ger synonymy, and argument overlap. This deci-sion is framed as a comparative ranking task, where the LLM integrates global context with structural cues from the SLM predictions. If the highest score exceeds a threshold θ, e is merged into the corre-sponding cluster C′ 

> i∗

; otherwise, a new cluster is initialized for e.To improve LLM efficiency, we adopt two strate-gies to reduce the candidate cluster search space. First, in core event–based cluster initialization ,core events are selected as seeds based on their con-nectivity within the SLM-predicted cluster, applied to clusters with at least three document-level events. Second, in trigger-based cluster grouping , event clusters are organized into coarse buckets based on trigger synonymy, identified by the LLM agent. The LLM then restricts its reasoning to the relevant 19258 bucket, avoiding unnecessary comparisons with unrelated clusters. 

Argument alignment Once an event e is as-signed to an event cluster C′ 

> i∗

, each of its arguments 

akj ∈ A e is evaluated for alignment with each candidate argument cluster CA′ 

> j

∈ C′ 

> A,i ∗

, where 

C′ 

> A,i ∗

⊆ C′ 

> A

denotes the set of argument clusters associated with C′ 

> i∗

. If a suitable argument cluster is identified, the argument is merged into it; other-wise, a new argument cluster is created. The LLM considers both role-level semantic compatibility and coreference cues derived from the initial SLM predictions. Crucially, the LLM is encouraged to override SLM predictions when contextually jus-tified—for example, aligning arguments with dif-ferent SLM-assigned roles but semantically equiv-alent referents, or rejecting SLM-suggested links that conflict with the broader discourse context. Through iterative reasoning, both the event clus-ter structure C′ 

> T

and argument clusters C′ 

> A

gradu-ally evolve toward greater internal coherence. 

3.5 Reasoning Stage II: Event Consolidation 

In the second reasoning stage, a separate LLM agent builds upon the intermediate event and argu-ment clusters C′ 

> T

and C′ 

> A

from the previous stage to iteratively perform cluster-level reasoning. The agent consolidates these clusters into a set of canon-ical events ˆE = {ˆe1, ˆe2, . . . , ˆem}. Each reasoning step comprises two subtasks: 

Trigger selection The LLM agent selects a canonical trigger ˆti from the set of candi-date triggers ti, 1, t i, 2, . . . , t i,m , which are ex-tracted from the constituent document-level events 

ei, 1, e i, 2, . . . , e i,m ⊆ C′

> i

.

Argument consolidation The LLM agent jointly assesses all argument clusters C′ 

> A,i

⊆ C′ 

> A

linked to C′

> i

. It first evaluates the relevance of each argu-ment cluster to the event, filtering out those that lack semantic coherence. Subsequently, the LLM iteratively selects a canonical argument from each retained cluster, which together compose the final argument set ˆAi. The relevance evaluation primar-ily focuses on two types of errors propagated from earlier stages: argument extraction errors, which involve filtering out arguments that are semanti-cally or factually inconsistent with the event’s core meaning; and argument coreference errors, which require removing redundant arguments that refer to the same underlying referent. This process jointly analyzes all argument clus-ters, leveraging the LLM’s ability to generalize from the majority of trustworthy arguments while revising outliers, ensuring semantic consistency and eliminating redundancy without relying on its internal standards. All prompting details are in Appendix C.4. To further clarify the components of our method, we provide a running example in Appendix C.5. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Model Details All LLM ICL experiments are conducted using the DeepSeek-V3 model (DeepSeek-AI, 2024) with the tem-perature set to 0 to reduce randomness. Each ICL experiment is run three times, and we report the average results. LLM SFT experiments are conducted with the Qwen-3-14B model (Qwen-Team, 2025). For SLMs in the pipeline, we use the default configurations from the original papers, with details in Appendix C.1. 

Evaluation Metric For CEAF-MEE, we evaluate trigger and argument matches using both exact and head match. Exact match requires full span overlap, while head match follows Li et al. (2021), allowing partial matches by comparing the head words of predicted and gold spans. If the head words align, the prediction is considered correct. We extract head words using the spaCy NLP toolkit (Honnibal et al., 2020) with the en_core_web_sm model. 

4.2 Main Results 

The overall performance comparison is shown in Table 2. Our collaborative method significantly outperforms all baselines in both exact and head match metrics, demonstrating its effectiveness for the task. Nevertheless, the relatively low absolute scores underscore the inherent difficulty of the task. Specifically, we observe the following: First, when comparing the pipeline and seq2seq approaches, we observe that, regardless of whether SFT or ICL is employed, the pipeline consistently outperforms seq2seq. In terms of exact match F1, the pipeline achieves 10% higher performance with SFT and 4.3% higher with ICL. This difference is primarily driven by recall, with the SFT pipeline achieving 14.8% higher recall and the ICL pipeline achieving 8.2% higher recall. These results sug-gest that the pipeline method we designed is better suited to capture the full range of requirements 19259 Method Exact match Head match P R F1 P R F1 Pipeline SLM SFT 31.4 45.0 35.6 36.6 52.5 41.6 LLM ICL 14.2 13.0 12.5 23.1 21.0 20.2 Seq2seq LLM SFT 27.8 30.2 26.6 34.0 36.9 32.7 LLM ICL 32.9 4.8 8.2 42.5 6.0 10.2 Our collaborative 37.7 48.4 41.2 43.6 55.8 47.6    

> Table 2: Multi-document event extraction results on ECB++. Our Collaborative method outperforms the baselines with statistically significant gains in both exact and head match F1 (paired t-test, p < 0.01 ).

for this complex task, while seq2seq-based meth-ods face significant challenges when generating di-rectly. These trends hold true for both exact match and head match metrics. Next, when comparing SFT with ICL, SFT clearly outperforms ICL, with a 23.1% higher ex-act match F1 in the pipeline setting and an 18.4% improvement in seq2seq. This improvement is pri-marily due to the significantly higher recall scores achieved by SFT (by 20–30%), highlighting the im-portance of supervised learning, which enables the model to better accommodate the task’s compre-hensive requirements. In contrast, the instruction-following and example-driven nature of ICL is in-sufficient to meet the task’s complex and nuanced requirements. These trends remain consistent for both exact match and head match metrics. Additionally, SFT achieves 17.2% higher pre-cision in the pipeline setting compared to ICL, whereas in the seq2seq case, ICL outperforms SFT in precision. This further suggests that seq2seq SFT methods face significant difficulties in handling the task’s complexity, which can potentially undermine the effectiveness of the underlying LLM. Finally, our collaborative method demonstrates improvement over both the pipeline and seq2seq ap-proaches. Compared to the SLM pipeline method, our approach boosts exact match F1 by 5.6% and head match F1 by 6%. Notably, recall improves by 3.5% over the SLM pipeline, suggesting that our collaborative framework enhances the initial SLM outputs by learning from these predictions and in-corporating more comprehensive global reasoning. Moreover, precision increases by 3.8% over LLM ICL, highlighting that our multi-step effectively leverages the LLM’s capabilities while preserving its inherent strengths. This allows our method to improve the SLM predictions without diminishing the LLM’s core performance. 

> Figure 4: Disentangled evaluation. “Overall” denotes the original evaluation, “Coref.” measures event coref-erence, and “Consol.” assesses argument consolidation.

4.3 Disentangled Analysis 

Multi-document event extraction involves both link-ing coreferential events and consolidating informa-tion across events, particularly focusing on argu-ments. To disentangle these components and as-sess them independently, we perform an evaluation-stage decomposition. In the standard evaluation, predicted events are aligned with gold events us-ing both triggers and arguments as matching cri-teria. Under this decomposition, event corefer-ence resolution is evaluated by removing all ar-guments and considering only triggers. Event argu-ment consolidation is assessed on matched event pairs—excluding unmatched events that would oth-erwise receive a zero score—thereby isolating the quality of argument integration while minimizing the influence of coreference errors. As shown in Figure 4, the overall score is sub-stantially lower than the separate coreference and consolidation scores, highlighting the inherent com-plexity of the task. The consolidation score re-mains lower than the coreference score, emphasiz-ing the difficulty of integrating argument informa-tion across multiple documents. Our collaborative approach outperforms the fine-tuned SLM pipeline by 8% F1 points on coreference evaluation and 4% F1 points on consolidation evaluation (under both exact and head match settings), demonstrating its effectiveness in addressing the key challenges of multi-document event extraction. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

To better understand the contribution of each com-ponent, we start with the complete reasoning pro-cess and progressively ablate key modules. To enable more fine-grained analysis, we treat the sub-steps of event composition—event assignment and argument alignment—as stage 1.1 and stage 1.2, 19260 Model Variant Exact F1 Head F1 SLM pipeline 35.6 41.6 Full collaborative model 41.2 47.6 - stage 1.1 36.5 42.6 - stage 1.2 & stage 2 39.3 45.2 - stage 2 39.9 46.0 - stage 1.2 41.0 47.1 

> Table 3: Step-by-step ablation of reasoning modules in the collaborative framework.

respectively, and ablate them individually. From Table 3, we observe that event assignment (stage 1.1) is of primary importance, as its removal leads to the most drastic performance decline, re-sulting in a 5% drop in the head F1 score. This step not only corrects event coreference but also lays the foundation for subsequent event consolidation. Next, argument alignment across events (stage 1.2) and cluster-level argument consolidation (stage 2) play crucial roles in final event canonicalization, with their removal causing a 2.6% decrease over-all. More specifically, removing stage 1.2 alone leads to a 1.6% drop, while removing stage 2 alone results in a 0.5% decrease. These results indicate that the two components contribute complementar-ily, each having a positive impact on the overall performance. A detailed case study illustrating the impact of these components is provided in Appendix D. 

4.5 Extended Analysis of LLM Capabilities LLM Self-Consistency We adopt a self-consistency strategy within our method, inspired by Yao et al. (2023), sampling each reasoning step three times, and using a dedicated LLM agent to select the most plausible output via a voting prompt. As shown in Table 4, unlike prior studies where self-consistency yields substantial gains, our approach yields only marginal improvements. We attribute this to two main factors. First, our carefully designed prompts help reduce sampling variance, producing relatively stable outputs. Second, a relatively simple voting prompt design—such as “analyze the choices below, con-clude which better follows the instruction”—lacks clear evaluative criteria in our task, making it less effective at consistently resolving subtle differences between outputs. 

Chat Model vs. Reasoning Model We com-pare two LLM backbones, DeepSeek-V3 (chat) and DeepSeek-R1 (reasoning) (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), Method Exact match Head match P R F1 P R F1 Collaborative 37.7 48.4 41.2 43.6 55.8 47.6 + self-consistency 38.1 48.3 41.3 43.6 55.9 47.7       

> + reasoning-backbone 36.0 47.2 39.6 42.0 55.2 46.3
> Table 4: Effect of LLM self-consistency and reasoning backbone on model performance.
> Figure 5: Impact of LLM model size on seq2seq SFT performance.

on our method. As shown in Table 4, R1 performs consistently worse. This may be attributed to a mis-alignment between the model’s internal reasoning and our task-specific logic. A basic observation is that, even when explicitly instructed to return “none” if no suitable cluster is found, R1 frequently returns a similar cluster instead. 

Impact of Model Size on LLM seq2seq SFT 

We evaluate different Qwen3 LLMs (8B and 14B) as backbones for the seq2seq SFT approach, with results illustrated in Figure 5. The performance gap between Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-14B is rela-tively small, especially when compared to the gap with the SLM pipeline and our method. This sug-gests that simply increasing model size may be insufficient to address the structural and contextual complexity of the task. Due to GPU memory limi-tations, we were unable to fine-tune larger models such as Qwen3-32B. 

4.6 Computational Efficiency 

We assess the efficiency of different methods in terms of computational resources and time. The SLM-based pipeline operates efficiently on a sin-gle GPU (e.g., NVIDIA V100), with each module training in a few hours and the entire process com-pleting within a dozen hours. Our collaborative method, which augments the SLM pipeline with LLMs for multi-step reasoning, is divided into two stages. The first stage requires a large search space, but we optimize it as detailed in 19261 our method, significantly reducing both time and computational cost. In total, the combined time for both stages is under 12 hours, depending on the performance of the DeepSeek API. For other LLM-based methods, the LLM seq2seq SFT method, training a 14B model on 8 NVIDIA 80GB A100 GPUs, takes several hours. The LLM seq2seq ICL and LLM pipeline ICL methods, both utilizing the DeepSeek API, require a few hours and about a dozen hours, respectively. 

5 Related Work 

Event Extraction In recent years, deep learn-ing has significantly advanced the field of event extraction. Most existing approaches rely on fine-tuning pretrained language models such as BERT or RoBERTa to model event-related semantics and dependencies within text (Wadden et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Sheng et al., 2021). Some methods further incorporate components like graph neural networks to better model the interac-tions among events and their arguments (Cao et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022). Nevertheless, event extrac-tion remains a challenging task due to the complex-ity of its underlying schema—requiring accurate identification of event types, triggers, and multi-ple argument roles within intricate contexts. For example, document-level role-filler extraction on MUC-4 yields only around 50% F1 (Du and Cardie, 2020), while argument extraction on WikiEvents barely exceeds 60% (Lin et al., 2025). 

Combination of LLM and SLM for IE Large language models have shown strong capabilities in understanding and reasoning across a wide range of NLP tasks—e.g., translation, summarization, and even math problem solving—often with just a few examples (Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024; Laban et al., 2023). How-ever, LLM-based in-context learning still gener-ally underperforms compared to supervised SLMs such as RoBERTa in the domain of information ex-traction (Han et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2024). This gap largely stems from the in-herent complexity of IE tasks, whose definitions often vary across different settings and datasets, making it difficult to fully specify the task using only a natural language instruction and a few exam-ples (Peng et al., 2023). To address this limitation, recent work has explored combining LLMs with SLMs to leverage their complementary strengths. Specifically, LLMs offer broad generalization capa-bilities and strong contextual understanding across diverse tasks, while SLMs provide better efficiency and can be fine-tuned for high accuracy on specific tasks. By integrating these advantages, such hy-brid approaches aim to achieve more robust and adaptable performance (Wan et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Min et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Nath et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024). 

Cross-document Event Reasoning Early work has explored extending the scope of event beyond single documents. Ji and Grishman (2008) lever-ages clusters of topically related documents to en-hance ACE event extraction by combining global cross-document evidence with local predictions. Ji et al. (2009) further introduces the task of cross-document event extraction and tracking, linking events involving the same centroid entity along a timeline. While exploring cross-document rea-soning, they do not fully address event-level ag-gregation—consolidating partial event information across sources into coherent representations. Recently, Gao et al. (2024) introduced a Chinese dataset, CLES, for cross-document event extrac-tion. While it shares the high-level objective of event aggregation with our work, the two differ sig-nificantly in task formulation and dataset character-istics. Specifically, they merge related events into broad conceptual units, abstracting from trigger-level details, whereas we maintain fine-grained trigger annotations to model sub-events like “ autho-rized ”, “ launched ”, and “ killed ” within an airstrike. Additionally, CLES is constructed from Chinese Wikipedia and leverages entity linking to a knowl-edge base for argument aggregation, whereas our ECB++ dataset is based on English news articles and uses coreference resolution to capture non-canonical mentions such as “ the child ” or “ she ”. 

6 Conclusion 

We investigate the task of multi-document event extraction, focusing on the key challenge of event aggregation. To support this, we establish a new benchmark and design a tailored evaluation metric. To address the complexity of event alignment and consolidation, we propose a collaborative frame-work: SLM components manage key local subtasks, while LLM components perform global reasoning. The multi-step reasoning process explicitly gen-erates rationales by integrating outputs from the SLMs and leveraging long-context understanding. 19262 Limitations 

While our framework yields notable gains over ex-isting baselines, it still depends considerably on the performance of fine-tuned SLMs for handling local subtasks. Errors from SLM agents can propagate to later stages, limiting the overall effectiveness of the system. Moreover, the current setup enforces a relatively fixed division of roles: SLMs are re-sponsible for local decisions, while LLMs perform global reasoning. This separation may limit the adaptability of the system. Future work could ex-plore more dynamic interaction between LLMs and SLMs—not only allowing LLMs to intervene in local decisions when needed, but also using LLM rationales and predictions to guide and refine the fine-tuning of SLMs. Additionally, due to GPU memory limitations, we were unable to fine-tune larger models such as Qwen3-32B. Fine-tuning LLMs is an important research direction. A potential avenue for improve-ment lies in fine-tuning decomposed intermediate steps rather than fine-tuning sequence-to-sequence generation. This approach could help alleviate the resource challenges associated with training LLMs, while still benefiting from the refined reasoning at each step. 

Ethical Considerations 

We adhere to the ACL Code of Ethics and ensure that no private or non-public data is used in this work. Our research relies on the widely-used, pub-licly available dataset ECB+ (Cybulska and Vossen, 2014) and focuses on objectively extracting event information. 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments to help improve the pa-per. This work has been supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Key Project under Grant Number 62336006 and the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Key Project under Grant Number 62161160339. 

References 

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In 36th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Volume 1 , pages 86–90, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Yuwei Cao, Hao Peng, Jia Wu, Yingtong Dou, Jianxin Li, and Philip S. Yu. 2021. Knowledge-preserving incremental social event detection via heterogeneous gnns. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 ,WWW ’21, page 3383–3395, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Arie Cattan, Alon Eirew, Gabriel Stanovsky, Mandar Joshi, and Ido Dagan. 2021. Cross-document coref-erence resolution over predicted mentions. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 5100–5107, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wei Chen, Lili Zhao, Zhi Zheng, Tong Xu, Yang Wang, and Enhong Chen. 2024. Double-checker: Large language model as a checker for few-shot named entity recognition. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 3172–3181, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yunmo Chen, William Gantt, Weiwei Gu, Tongfei Chen, Aaron White, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2023. Itera-tive document-level information extraction via imita-tion learning. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 1858–1874, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2014. Using a sledge-hammer to crack a nut? lexical diversity and event coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC‘14) , pages 4545–4552, Reyk-javik, Iceland. European Language Resources Asso-ciation (ELRA). DeepSeek-AI. 2024. Deepseek-v3 technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2412.19437. DeepSeek-AI. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing rea-soning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2501.12948. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Bowen Ding, Qingkai Min, Shengkun Ma, Yingjie Li, Linyi Yang, and Yue Zhang. 2024. A rationale-centric counterfactual data augmentation method for cross-document event coreference resolution. In Pro-ceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1112–1140, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. 19263 Xinya Du and Claire Cardie. 2020. Document-level event role filler extraction using multi-granularity contextualized encoding. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 8010–8020, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xinya Du, Alexander Rush, and Claire Cardie. 2021. GRIT: Generative role-filler transformers for document-level event entity extraction. In Proceed-ings of the 16th Conference of the European Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 634–644, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qiang Gao, Zixiang Meng, Bobo Li, Jun Zhou, Fei Li, Chong Teng, and Donghong Ji. 2024. Harvest-ing events from multiple sources: Towards a cross-document event extraction paradigm. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 1913–1927, Bangkok, Thailand. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Ridong Han, Tao Peng, Chaohao Yang, Benyou Wang, Lu Liu, and Xiang Wan. 2023. Is information extrac-tion solved by chatgpt? an analysis of performance, evaluation criteria, robustness and errors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14450 , page 48. Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Lan-deghem, and Adriane Boyd. 2020. spaCy: Industrial-strength Natural Language Processing in Python. Kuan-Hao Huang, I-Hung Hsu, Tanmay Parekh, Zhiyu Xie, Zixuan Zhang, Prem Natarajan, Kai-Wei Chang, Nanyun Peng, and Heng Ji. 2024. TextEE: Bench-mark, reevaluation, reflections, and future challenges in event extraction. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 12804–12825, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining event extraction through cross-document inference. In Pro-ceedings of ACL-08: HLT , pages 254–262, Colum-bus, Ohio. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Heng Ji, Ralph Grishman, Zheng Chen, and Prashant Gupta. 2009. Cross-document event extraction and tracking: Task, evaluation, techniques and chal-lenges. In Proceedings of the International Con-ference RANLP-2009 , pages 166–172, Borovets, Bul-garia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Philippe Laban, Wojciech Kryscinski, Divyansh Agar-wal, Alexander Fabbri, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2023. SummEdits: Measuring LLM ability at factual reasoning through the lens of summarization. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9662–9676, Singapore. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and com-prehension. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 7871–7880, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Bo Li, Gexiang Fang, Yang Yang, Quansen Wang, Wei Ye, Wen Zhao, and Shikun Zhang. 2023a. Evaluating chatgpt’s information extraction capabilities: An as-sessment of performance, explainability, calibration, and faithfulness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11633 .Fayuan Li, Weihua Peng, Yuguang Chen, Quan Wang, Lu Pan, Yajuan Lyu, and Yong Zhu. 2020. Event extraction as multi-turn question answering. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 829–838, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Junpeng Li, Zixia Jia, and Zilong Zheng. 2023b. Semi-automatic data enhancement for document-level re-lation extraction with distant supervision from large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5495–5505, Singapore. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Qi Li, Heng Ji, and Liang Huang. 2013. Joint event extraction via structured prediction with global fea-tures. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 73–82, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sha Li, Heng Ji, and Jiawei Han. 2021. Document-level event argument extraction by conditional generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 894–908, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Xingjian Lin, Shengfei Lyu, Xin Wang, Qiuju Chen, and Huanhuan Chen. 2025. Generation-augmented and embedding fusion in document-level event argu-ment extraction. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 4078–4084, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yubo Ma, Yixin Cao, Yong Hong, and Aixin Sun. 2023. Large language model is not a good few-shot informa-tion extractor, but a good reranker for hard samples! In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 10572–10601, Sin-gapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yubo Ma, Zehao Wang, Yixin Cao, Mukai Li, Meiqi Chen, Kun Wang, and Jing Shao. 2022. Prompt for extraction? PAIE: Prompting argument interaction for event argument extraction. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 19264 6759–6774, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Qingkai Min, Qipeng Guo, Xiangkun Hu, Songfang Huang, Zheng Zhang, and Yue Zhang. 2024. Syner-getic event understanding: A collaborative approach to cross-document event coreference resolution with large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2985– 3002, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Abhijnan Nath, Shadi Manafi Avari, Avyakta Chelle, and Nikhil Krishnaswamy. 2024. Okay, let‘s do this! modeling event coreference with generated rationales and knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 3931–3946, Mexico City, Mexico. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Jianhui Chen, Weikai Li, Yun-jia Qi, Zimu Wang, Zhili Wu, Kaisheng Zeng, Bin Xu, Lei Hou, and 1 others. 2023. When does in-context learning fall short and why? a study on specification-heavy tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08993 .Qwen-Team. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Jiawei Sheng, Shu Guo, Bowen Yu, Qian Li, Yiming Hei, Lihong Wang, Tingwen Liu, and Hongbo Xu. 2021. CasEE: A joint learning framework with cas-cade decoding for overlapping event extraction. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 164–174, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qingyun Sun, Jianxin Li, Hao Peng, Jia Wu, Xingcheng Fu, Cheng Ji, and Philip S Yu. 2022. Graph struc-ture learning with variational information bottleneck. 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 36(4):4165–4174. David Wadden, Ulme Wennberg, Yi Luan, and Han-naneh Hajishirzi. 2019. Entity, relation, and event extraction with contextualized span representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5784– 5789, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Zhen Wan, Fei Cheng, Zhuoyuan Mao, Qianying Liu, Haiyue Song, Jiwei Li, and Sadao Kurohashi. 2023. GPT-RE: In-context learning for relation extraction using large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3534–3547, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Longyue Wang, Chenyang Lyu, Tianbo Ji, Zhirui Zhang, Dian Yu, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2023. Document-level machine translation with large lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 16646–16661, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Runxin Xu, Tianyu Liu, Lei Li, and Baobao Chang. 2021. Document-level event extraction via heteroge-neous graph-based interaction model with a tracker. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3533–3546, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xin Xu, Yuqi Zhu, Xiaohan Wang, and Ningyu Zhang. 2023. How to unleash the power of large language models for few-shot relation extraction? In Proceed-ings of the Fourth Workshop on Simple and Efficient Natural Language Processing (SustaiNLP) , pages 190–200, Toronto, Canada (Hybrid). Association for Computational Linguistics. Yifan Xu, Xiao Liu, Xinghan Liu, Zhenyu Hou, Yueyan Li, Xiaohan Zhang, Zihan Wang, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Zhao Wenyi, Jie Tang, and Yux-iao Dong. 2024. ChatGLM-math: Improving math problem-solving in large language models with a self-critique pipeline. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 9733–9760, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hang Yang, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Yang Xiao, and Jun Zhao. 2018. DCFEE: A document-level Chi-nese financial event extraction system based on au-tomatically labeled training data. In Proceedings of ACL 2018, System Demonstrations , pages 50–55, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hang Yang, Dianbo Sui, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Jun Zhao, and Taifeng Wang. 2021. Document-level event extraction via parallel prediction networks. In 

Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6298– 6308, Online. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sen Yang, Dawei Feng, Linbo Qiao, Zhigang Kan, and Dongsheng Li. 2019. Exploring pre-trained language models for event extraction and generation. In Pro-ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5284– 19265 5294, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822. Junjie Ye, Nuo Xu, Yikun Wang, Jie Zhou, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, and Xuanjing Huang. 2024. Llm-da: Data augmentation via large language models for few-shot named entity recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14568 .Haopeng Zhang, Xiao Liu, and Jiawei Zhang. 2023. Extractive summarization via ChatGPT for faithful summary generation. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 ,pages 3270–3278, Singapore. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Mengna Zhu, Kaisheng Zeng, JibingWu JibingWu, Li-hua Liu, Hongbin Huang, Lei Hou, and Juanzi Li. 2024. LC4EE: LLMs as good corrector for event extraction. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 12028–12038, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. 19266 A Illustrative Examples of SLM Errors and LLM Rationales 

As noted in the introduction, multi-document event extraction challenges for both small language model supervised fine-tuning pipeline and large language model sequence-to-sequence generation. This appendix provides concrete illustrations to clarify (i) representative errors arising in SLM pipeline subtasks and (ii) what kinds of explicit rationales are required for LLM reasoning to sup-port performance and interpretability but are not easily supplied through prompts. 

A.1 SLM Pipeline Errors 

We illustrate two representative sources of errors in SLM pipeline: 

(a) Document-level argument extraction. This component has an F1 score below 70%. For exam-ple, given the following source sentence: “A strong earthquake rattled Indonesia’s West Papua province Wednesday just days after a powerful quake levelled buildings and killed one person... The 6.1-magnitude quake was the latest in a series of dozens of powerful tremors to have hit the region since 7.6 and 7.5 magnitude quakes that struck off the provincial capital Manokwari on Sun-day... Wednesday’s shallow quake hit at 7:48 am (2248 GMT Tuesday)...” The SLM system outputs are shown in Table 5. 

(b) Cross-document event coreference. This component has an F1 score below 80%. Consider the following text: “Earlier this morning, an earthquake (1) with a preliminary magnitude of 2.0 struck near The Geysers, according to the USGS. The earthquake (2) struck at about 7:30 a.m. and had a depth of 1.4 miles, according to the USGS. The 4.2-magnitude earthquake (3) was recorded at approximately 9:27 a.m. Sunday, ac-cording to the US Geological Survey, which originally had rated the quake (4) as 4.4 in magnitude.” All four mentions (1–4) refer to the same seismic event trigger, but the SLM pipeline linked only (1) and (2), leaving (3) and (4) unclustered. In a separate report on the same topic: “A 4.2-magnitude earthquake (5) shook a remote area of eastern Sonoma County on Sunday morning, the largest in a flurry over the weekend, according to the U.S. Geological Survey.” Here, SLM correctly linked (5) to quake (4) but still failed to reconnect mentions (3) and (4) back into the main event cluster, resulting in a frag-mented representation. 

A.2 Explicit Rationales Required for LLMs 

To illustrate the structured reasoning process, we present one representative iteration from Reasoning Stage I of Event Composition. 

Input: Event Clusters and Candidate Event 

(AXXX refers to the argument cluster id predicted by SLM): Event Cluster 1 (EC1) Trigger: injured 

Human Participant: dozens (A777) Non-Human Participant: quake (A768) Time: Tuesday (A784) Location: in a region (A783) Event Cluster 2 (EC2) Trigger: injured 

Human Participant: others (A781) Non-Human Participant: quakes (A768) Time: Sunday (A764) Location: Papua, eastern Indonesia (A848) Candidate Event Trigger: injuring 

Human Participant: dozens (A777) Non-Human Participant: quake (A768) Location: across the affected region (A798) 19267 Argument Role Prediction Gold Standard Match?             

> Human Participant person one person No (incomplete) Non-Human Participant 7.6 quake No (role confusion) Time Wednesday on Sunday No (misaligned) Location Indonesia’s West Papua province Indonesia’s West Papua province Yes
> Table 5: Examples of argument extraction errors in the SLM pipeline.

Sub-step 1: Event-to-cluster assignment 

Feature Comparison 

Context 

EC1: Same event: 6.1 quake in Aceh EC2: Different event: Quake in Papua Decision: EC1 aligned 

Trigger 

EC1: injuring ≈ injured 

EC2: injuring ≈ injured 

Decision: Both match 

Human Participant 

EC1: dozens (A777) EC2: others (A781) Decision: Exact match with EC1 

Non-Human Participant 

EC1: quake (A768) EC2: quakes (A768) Decision: Shared across both 

Time 

EC1: (missing) vs. Tuesday (A784) EC2: (missing) vs. Sunday (A764) Decision: No contradiction with EC1 

Location 

EC1: region (A798) vs. region (A783) EC2: region (A798) vs. Papua (A848) Decision: Consistent with EC1 LLM Decision 

Relevance Level : e (Same news, synony-mous triggers, consistent arguments) 

Action : Merge the candidate event into EC1 

Sub-step 2: Argument alignment 

Argument Alignment 

Human Participant : dozens (A777) LLM Reasoning: Exact match confirms identity 

Non-Human Participant : quake (A768) LLM Reasoning: Exact match confirms same entity 

Location : in a region, across the affected region (A783, A798) LLM Reasoning: Semantically similar, in-ferred same location 

Time : Tuesday (A784) LLM Reasoning: Candidate lacks explicit time but does not contradict Tuesday; in-ferred same 19268 B Dataset Details 

B.1 Annotation Guidelines B.1.1 Event Definition 

In line with the TimeML specification, we define an event as a situation that “happens or occurs”. Fol-lowing the ECB+ guidelines, we categorize events into several fine-grained types: 1. Occurrence : These events describe things that happen in the world, such as die, crash, build, merge, sell, land, arrive, distribute, eruption, explosion .2. Perception : Actions involving the perception of another event, e.g., see, hear, watch, feel, glimpse, behold, listen, overhear .3. Reporting : Actions related to reporting by people or organizations, such as say, report, tell, announce, explain, cite, state .4. Aspectual : These events focus on different facets of event development, such as begin, finish, stop, continue , capturing initiation, cul-mination, and continuation. 5. State : Denotes states of being or circum-stances, including expressions like be on board, hope, live, shortage, was an actor, the crisis, peace . Often appears in predicative constructions (e.g., to be + nominal/adjectival phrase). 6. Causative : Describes causal actions, such as 

cause, lead to, result, facilitate, induce, pro-duce, bring about .7. Generic : Used for generic events not an-chored in specific time or space. Each event is represented as a trig-ger–arguments structure , where: • Trigger : A word or phrase signaling the oc-currence of the event. • Arguments : Entities or events fulfilling spe-cific semantic roles. The arguments typically include: • Time : When something happens or holds true. • Location : Where something happens or holds true. • Participants : Who or what is involved, di-vided into: 

– Human Participants – Non-Human Participants 

The example below shows a structured event representation:        

> Event Components Value Trigger injured
> Time on Tuesday
> Location 1 in Indonesia’s Aceh province
> Location 2 western tip of Sumatra island
> Human Participant dozens of villagers
> Non-Human Participant 6.1-magnitude quake

B.1.2 Annotation of Event Arguments 

Our annotation process builds on the Event Coref-erence Bank Plus (ECB+), a widely used public benchmark for cross-document event coreference resolution. The ECB+ corpus contains 982 news articles spanning 43 topics, including earthquakes, criminal cases, and corporate acquisitions. The objective of our annotation is to identify arguments for each event mention in a document. The event triggers are inherited directly from the ECB+ dataset, ensuring consistency with the origi-nal event coreference annotations. To streamline the process, we developed a cus-tom web-based annotation tool. During each anno-tation session, annotators were presented with: • A target event pre-annotated from ECB+. • A full document containing the event. • A list of candidate arguments, which included: 

– Entities (from ECB+). 

– Other event mentions from the same doc-ument (from ECB+). Annotators are instructed to select the arguments that semantically fit the target event from the pro-vided candidate set. To ensure consistency and semantic accuracy, the following procedures were followed: • Annotators were required to consult the FrameNet database (https://framenet. icsi.berkeley.edu/framenet_search )to identify the appropriate semantic frame corresponding to each target event. 19269 • Based on the selected frame, annotators de-termined which roles needed to be filled and matched these with candidate arguments from the document. • Annotators are encouraged to select all candi-dates that satisfied the semantic constraints of the identified frame. This two-tiered approach—anchoring event se-mantics in FrameNet and constraining annotation to document-internal candidate sets—ensures high annotation quality and interpretability. 

About FrameNet 

FrameNet is a lexicographic database based on frame semantics, a linguistic theory that describes meaning through conceptual structures called 

frames . Each frame represents a typical situation (e.g., an injury event) and defines the semantic roles (called frame elements ) that participants play in that situation. For example, the “injured” event corresponds to the “Injury” frame, which describes an event where an Agent causes harm to a Victim . The corresponding semantic roles are outlined as below: 

Semantic Frame Agent: 6.1-magnitude quake 

Explanation: The event causing the injury. 

Victim: Dozens of villagers 

Explanation: The entities that are injured. 

Time: On Tuesday 

Explanation: The time when the injury oc-curred. 

Place 1: In Indonesia’s Aceh province 

Explanation: The location where the injury took place. 

Place 2: Western tip of Sumatra island 

Explanation: Another location where the injury took place. Using FrameNet to identify semantic frames and their elements ensures annotators consistently in-terpret the roles of event arguments, enhancing the clarity and quality of the annotations. 

B.1.3 Annotation Review 

To ensure annotation quality, a review process is conducted. In this stage, a senior annotator vali-dates and refines the initial annotations. For each target event, the senior annotator is provided with the golden trigger and its annotated arguments from the first stage. Following the same procedure as the initial an-notation, senior annotators are asked to consult FrameNet to identify the semantic frame evoked by each trigger. Based on the frame structure, they ver-ify whether the selected arguments correctly filled the expected semantic roles (e.g., Agent , Victim ,

Time , Place ) and whether any required arguments are missing. To illustrate the correction process, we provide the following example: 

Original Document 

Indian ship thwarts piracy attempt in Gulf of Aden, 26 pirates arrested. Up-dated: November 11, 2011, 18:50 IST. Indian Naval ship, INS Sukanya, thwarted a piracy attack in the Gulf of Aden and captured three boats of the pirates. A statement from the Defence PRO says the incident happened yester-day when INS Sukanya was escorting a group of merchant vessels. 

Annotation Correction Semantic Role Argument Perpetrator pirates      

> Victim vessels
> Instrument boats (added)
> Time yesterday
> Place Gulf of Aden

Correction Explanation 

“Boats” was initially overlooked in the annotations as a potential Instrument ,representing the object that the pirates used to carry out the attack. This correc-tion ensures that all semantic roles are properly filled. This protocol allowed us to improve both recall and precision of argument annotations while main-taining consistency across the dataset. 

B.1.4 Annotation Examples Based on Web UI 

To assist with the annotation process, we developed a custom web-based interface that simplifies the task of annotating event arguments within a docu-ment. The web UI allows annotators to view the 19270 full document and select relevant arguments from a pre-defined list. The interface is designed for efficiency and ease of use, enabling high-quality annotations. To clarify how the annotation process works, let’s examine examples of a piracy event. As shown in the Figure 6 and Figure 7, the upper-left box dis-plays all occurrences of the same “piracy” event across different documents. By clicking on each event, the corresponding document appears on the right side of the interface. The event mentions in the document are highlighted in blue, while the can-didate arguments are shown in red. On the lower-left corner, there is a list of candidate arguments, which includes both event mentions and entities that might be relevant to the event. In the first example (Figure 6), the annotator selects the following relevant arguments:      

> Argument Role
> ships Vehicle arms Instrument attempt Purpose international waters Location

In the second example (Figure 7), the selected arguments are:      

> Argument Role
> vessels Victim in the Gulf of Aden Location attack Purpose on 10 Nov 11 Time

Additionally, we provide the FrameNet semantic frame for the “piracy” event, as shown in Figure 8, which annotators can reference. This frame helps annotators correctly identify the semantic roles of the arguments, such as Perpetrator , Victim , In-strument , and others. Annotators are instructed to consult the FrameNet database to select arguments for each event trigger. 

B.2 Dataset Statistic 

Table 6 provides a breakdown of argument dis-tribution across documents. In the case of multi-document events, a significant portion of the argu-ments (1,230, or approximately 40%) are unique to a single document, while the remainder, 1,866 ar-guments (approximately 60%), appear in multiple documents. Specifically, a large number of events are mentioned in two or more documents, with 632 arguments occurring in two documents, 350 in three, and 222 in four, reflecting considerable redundancy. This redundancy indicates a substan-tial overlap in the events reported across different sources, highlighting the need for more sophisti-cated aggregation techniques to handle repeated arguments, rather than relying on simple merging strategies. In contrast, arguments in single-document events occur only within one document by definition, with 4,669 such arguments. This reflects the inherent uniqueness of content in individual news articles, in stark contrast to the redundancy found in multi-document events. 19271 Figure 6: Example 1 for the “piracy” event. 

Figure 7: Example 2 for the “piracy” event. 

# Docs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Multi-doc Events 1230 632 350 222 188 130 80 70 58 54 30 20 18 3 4 1 4 2Single-doc Events 4669 – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

Table 6: Argument distribution across documents. 19272 Figure 8: The semantic frame for the piracy event as found in FrameNet, illustrating key roles such as Perpetrator ,

Victim , Instrument , and Location .19273 C Model Implementations 

C.1 SLM-based Pipeline Models Event Trigger Detection We follow the ap-proach in Cattan et al. (2021), which uses a BERT-based (Devlin et al., 2019) span scorer with prun-ing to keep only high-quality candidate triggers on ECB+ dataset. For each candidate span s ∈ S d

within document d, a scoring function f (s, d ) eval-uates its likelihood of being an event trigger. The final trigger set Td is formed by selecting spans whose scores exceed a predefined threshold τ :

Td = {s ∈ S d | f (s, d ) > τ }.

Cross-Document Event Coreference Resolu-tion We adopt the method from Cattan et al. (2021), performing coreference resolution over pre-dicted events rather than gold-standard annotations. Coreference scores are computed for all pairs of candidate events (ei, e j ) both within and across documents, where ei, e j ∈ E all :Score (ei, e j ) = fθ(ei, e j ),

with fθ denoting a BERT-based pairwise scorer. Cross-document event clusters are then formed via agglomerative clustering on Eall , using the simi-larity scores and a threshold τ :

CT = AgglomerativeCluster (Eall , Score , τ ).

Document-Level Event Argument Extraction 

We adopt a trigger-based approach for document-level argument extraction Ma et al. (2022). Given a trigger t ∈ Td in document d, and a predefined set of roles R = {r1, r 2, . . . , r k}, the model selects the most likely argument span for each role from a candidate set Sd ∪ { ϵ}, where ϵ denotes a null span indicating no argument. Formally, for each role r ∈ R , the predicted argument is: 

a∗ 

> r

= arg max  

> s∈S d∪{ ϵ}

Score (s | d, t, r ),

where Score (s | d, t, r ) is computed by a BART-based (Lewis et al., 2020) model conditioned on d,

t, and r via prompt-based input formatting. The final argument set for trigger t is: 

At = {(r, a ∗ 

> r

) | a∗

> r

̸ = ϵ}.

Cross-Document Argument Coreference Resolu-tion We use a model similar to event coreference to separately handle argument coreference, address-ing the complexity of cases where events serve as arguments for other events in nested structures. A BERT-based pairwise scorer followed by agglom-erative clustering groups argument mentions into clusters CA = {CA 

> 1

, C A 

> 2

, . . . }.

Event Canonicalization We apply a frequency-based heuristic to select canonical representatives within each event cluster Ci. Specifically, given the set of triggers Ti = {ti1, t i2, . . . , t im } and the set of argument mentions Ai = {ai1, a i2, . . . , a in } ex-tracted from the constituent document-level events in cluster Ci, we define the canonical trigger and arguments as: 

ˆti = arg max 

> t∈Ti

freq (t),

ˆAi =

{

arg max  

> a∈C

freq (a) | C ∈ C (Ai)

}

,19274 Module Backbone Model Learning Rate Batch Size Epochs / Steps Other Hyperparameters Event Trigger Detection RoBERTa-large 1e-4 16 10 epochs Max span length: 10 Score threshold: 0.25 Cross-Document Event Coreference Resolution RoBERTa-large 1e-4 32 10 epochs Clustering linkage: average Clustering merge threshold: 0.5 Document-Level Event Argument Extraction BART-base 2e-5 16 10,000 steps Max span length: 10 Prompt template: concatenate Max prompt length: 80 Cross-Document Argument Coreference Resolution RoBERTa-large 1e-4 32 10 epochs Clustering linkage: average Clustering merge threshold: 0.8 

Table 7: Hyperparameter settings for SLMs in the pipeline. 

where freq (·) denotes the frequency of occurrence, and C(Ai) represents the set of argument clusters associated with Ci. The canonical event represen-tation is thus ˆei = (ˆ ti, ˆAi).

Hyperparameters For models that require train-ing, the hyperparameter settings are provided in Table 7. 

C.2 LLM-based Pipeline Prompts 

We have adapted the standard SLM-based pipeline by leveraging the extended context handling ability and flexibility of LLMs, resulting in a modified pipeline tailored for multi-document processing. 

Step 1: Event trigger detection Task Objective: 

You are given a natural language document composed of multiple sentences. Your task is to identify event triggers in each sentence. A trigger is the head word or phrase that most strongly conveys the event’s meaning. Wrap each identified trigger with ## .

1. Trigger Extent 

- Mark only the head of the event phrase: - For 

verbal expressions , annotate only the main verb (e.g., ##shooting## , not may have been shooting ). - For nominal expressions , anno-tate the main noun that expresses the event (e.g., ##earthquake## ). - Do not annotate : -Auxiliary verbs (e.g., may , have , did ). - Nega-tion words (e.g., not , never ). - Determiners and adjectives (e.g., this terrible in this terrible war ). - In light-verb construc-tions , annotate both the verb and the noun sep-arately : - e.g., “make an offer” → ##make## ,

##offer## .

2. Valid Parts of Speech for Triggers 

Triggers can be: - Verbs : e.g., ##fights## ,

##arrives## - Nouns (including nominaliza-tions and proper nouns): e.g., ##eruption## ,

##World War II## - Attributive participles :e.g., ##crying## in “the crying baby” - Pred-icative complements (after copular verbs): e.g., ##marine## in “was a marine” - Pro-nouns referring to prior events: e.g., ##It## 

in “It did not trigger a tsunami” 

3. Output Format 

- Assign a sentence ID (Sentence1, Sentence2, etc.) for each sentence. - Wrap each trig-ger with ## . - Preserve the original sentence wording in full. - Return one labeled sentence per line. - If multiple triggers appear, wrap each independently. 

Instructions to the model: 

- Read the paragraph sentence by sentence. -Identify each event trigger and wrap it with ## .- Return one labeled sentence per line using the format above. The document to process is as following: 

> {}

Step 2: Event argument extraction Task Objective: 

You are given a document formatted as:   

> Sentence1 : ... Sentence2 : ...

Your task is to extract all events. An event consists of: • trigger : the head word or phrase already annotated with ## .• arguments : four types— 

– TIME : answers “when” (dates, times, relative times). 

– LOCATION : answers “where” (places, venues, regions). 

– HUMAN_PART : answers “who” (indi-viduals, groups, pronouns). 19275 – NON_HUMAN_PART : answers “what” (objects, institutions, abstract enti-ties). • If multiple mentions of the same type occur, assign numbered keys (e.g. 

HUMAN_PART_1 , HUMAN_PART_2 ). 

Output Format: 

Return only a JSON array of event objects. No explanatory text. Each object must have:        

> {" event_id ": " E1 ", " trigger ": "..." , " arguments ": {" TIME ": "..." , " LOCATION ": "..." , " HUMAN_PART ": "..." , " NON_HUMAN_PART ": "..." }}

Example          

> Sentence1 : He ## arrived ## in Paris on January 1. Sentence2 : They ## celebrated ## the victory .

Expected output:                

> [{" event_id ": " E1 ", " trigger ": " arrived ", " arguments ": {" TIME ": " January 1" , " LOCATION ": " Paris ", " HUMAN_PART ": " He ", " NON_HUMAN_PART ": "" }}, {" event_id ": " E2 ", " trigger ": "..." , " arguments ": {" TIME ": "..." , " LOCATION ": "..." , " HUMAN_PART ": "..." , " NON_HUMAN_PART ": "..." }}... ]

Instructions to the model: 

Read each sentence, extract events in order, and output exactly the JSON array above. Here is the document to process: 

> {}

Step 3: Cross-document event coreference resolution Task Objective: 

You are given a single document with: • doc_id : a unique identifier. • text : the full document text. • events : a list of objects, each with: 

– event_id , trigger , arguments :keys TIME , LOCATION , HUMAN_PART ,

NON_HUMAN_PART 

Clustering Steps: 

1. Gather all events into a flat list. 2. Identify coreference groups by trigger lemma and argument overlap. 3. For each group: • Assign cluster_id (C1 , C2 , . . . ). • Select earliest trigger. • For each role, pool non-empty values, dedupe, pick earliest; omit if none. • Add original_events : merged 

event_id s. 4. Singleton events form their own cluster. 

Output Format: 

Return only JSON, no extra text:    

> {" clusters ": [{" cluster_id ":" C1 ", " triggers ":[" hold "] , " arguments ":{ " HUMAN_PART ":[" He "] , " NON_HUMAN_PART ":[" the screen "] }, " original_events ":[" E7 " ," E8 "] }, {" cluster_id ":" C2 ", " triggers ":[" want "] , " arguments ":{ " HUMAN_PART ":[" we "] , " NON_HUMAN_PART ":[" the ceremony "] }, " original_events ":[" E5 "] }... ]}

Instructions to the model: 

Read the input JSON, perform clustering, and output exactly the JSON under “clusters” .Here is the document: 

> {}

Step 4: Event consolidation Input Format: 

You will be given a list of document entries. Each entry has: • "doc_id" : the document identifier • "clusters" : an array of intra-document clusters, each with: 

– "cluster_id" 

– "trigger" : [ . . . ] 

– "arguments" : {"TIME": [ . . . 19276 ], "LOCATION": [ . . . ], "HUMAN_PART": [ . . . ], "NON_HUMAN_PART": [ . . . ]}

– "original_events" : [ . . . ] 

TASK: Merge Across Documents 

Merge these clusters into global event clusters. Return only the final JSON. 

Steps: 

1. Pool all clusters into one flat list. 2. Identify cross-document coreference sets by: • Matching or synonym-equivalent trigger lemmas. • Overlapping or identical argument values. 3. For each set: • Assign "EC_id" (EC1 , EC2 , . . . ). • Select earliest trigger. • For each role, collect non-empty val-ues, dedupe, pick earliest; omit if none. 4. Non-coreference clusters become single-ton global clusters. 

Output Format: 

Return a JSON array:       

> [{" EC_id ": " EC1 ", " trigger ": [" hold "] , " arguments ": {" HUMAN_PART ": [" He "] , " NON_HUMAN_PART ": [" the screen "] }}, ... ]

Here is the INPUT: 

> {}

C.3 LLM Sequence-to-Sequence Prompts LLM seq2seq ICL prompt Task Objective: 

The goal is to first identify events within in-dividual documents, where each event con-sists of a trigger and its associated arguments, and then consolidate these events from multi-ple documents into corpus-level event clusters. Some events from different documents may refer to the same real-world event, and these should be merged into a single cluster after consolidation. 

An example is provided as follows: 

Input documents: {} 

Example: "Doc_1":". . . ", "Events_of_this_document":". . . ", "Doc_2":". . . ", . . . 

Event cluster ids consisting of event ids from individual documents: {} 

Example: "event_cluster_id":"EC1", "related_event_ids":"D1_E2","D2_E3", "D3_E1",. . . 

Output event clusters: {} 

Example: "event_cluster_id":"EC1", "canonical_trigger": "Oscar", "arguments": ". . . ",. . . 

An exercise is provided as follows: 

Input documents: 

> {}

LLM seq2seq SFT prompt Task Definition: 

To accomplish the multi-document event extraction task, you need to extract a struc-tured representation of events from the given multiple documents. You are required to extract all parameter information of the events, including time, location, participants, etc., and mark the role information for all time parameters. For event entities, if there are multiple forms of synonymous entities, please select the most representative form. For the role information of entities, if the same entity has multiple roles, choose the most representative role as the final role. Output in the following JSON format: "trigger": "Event Trigger", "arguments": [ "role": "Role1", "mention": "Entity1", "role": "Role2", "mention": "Entity2" ... ]Input documents: 

> {}

Output: 19277 C.4 Our Collaborative Framework Prompts Reasoning stage 1.1: Event-to-cluster as-signment Task Objective: 

Find the most relevant event cluster for merg-ing. 

Document-Level Event Structure: 

Each event in a document has the following structure: • event_id : A unique identifier for the event. • trigger : A keyword or phrase that trig-gers the event. • arguments : A list of arguments, each with: 

– argument_id : A unique identifier for the argument. 

– role : One of * time : specific moment or dura-tion when the event occurs * location : the place or area where the event takes place * human participant : the peo-ple who participate in or influ-ence the event * non_human participant : en-tities or nested events 

– mention : The specific textual ex-pression that refers to the argument. 

– argument_cluster_id : The ID of the argument cluster it belongs to. 

Corpus-Level Event Cluster Structure: 

Each cluster has: • EC_id : A unique ID for the event cluster. • triggers : A list of triggers concatenated from the document-level events. • arguments : A list of merged arguments, each with: 

– roles : List of roles concatenated from the document-level arguments. 

– mentions : List of mentions concate-nated from the document-level argu-ments. 

– argument_cluster_ids : List of ar-gument cluster IDs concatenated from the document-level arguments. 

Procedure: 

Stage 1: Identify the most relevant cluster 

• Context: Compare document contexts. • Trigger: Check for synonymy. • Arguments: Compare time, location, par-ticipants; infer missing details. 

Stage 2: Select relevance level 

• a: Different seminal news. • b: Same news, not synonymous triggers. • c: Same news, synonymous triggers, sig-nificant differences. • d: Same news, synonymous triggers, ba-sic match. • e: Same news, synonymous triggers, all aspects match. • Merge decision: – If level d or e, merge .

– Otherwise, create .

Output Requirements: 

• Detailed analysis for both stages. • A JSON object with fields: 

– decision : "merge" or "create" .

– most_relevant_event_cluster_id :cluster ID or "none" .• No extraneous text in the JSON. 

Input documents and corresponding events: 

{} 

Existing event clusters: {} 

Candidate event: {} 

Reasoning stage 1.2: Argument alignment Task Objective: 

Merge the candidate event into the target event cluster. 

Document-Level Event Structure: 

Each event in a document has the following structure: • event_id : A unique identifier for the event. • trigger : A keyword or phrase that trig-gers the event. • arguments : A list of arguments, each with: 

– argument_id : A unique identifier for the argument. 

– role : One of * time : specific moment or dura-tion when the event occurs * location : the place or area where the event takes place * human participant : the peo-ple who participate in or influ-ence the event 19278 * non_human participant : en-tities or nested events 

– mention : The specific textual ex-pression that refers to the argument. 

– argument_cluster_id : The ID of the argument cluster it belongs to. 

Corpus-Level Event Cluster Structure: 

Each corpus-level event cluster has: • EC_id : A unique ID for the event cluster. • triggers : List of triggers concatenated from document-level events. • arguments : List of merged arguments, each with: 

– roles : List of roles concatenated from document-level arguments. 

– mentions : List of mentions con-catenated from document-level argu-ments. 

– argument_cluster_ids : List of ar-gument cluster IDs concatenated from document-level arguments. 

Procedure: 

For each component in the candidate event: • Trigger merging : Append the candidate trigger to the cluster’s triggers list. • Argument merging : For each candidate argument: 

– Determine match by semantic simi-larity and argument_cluster_id :* Similar & same cluster →

match * Similar & different cluster →

match * Not similar & same cluster →

no match * Not similar & different cluster 

→ no match 

– If matched: append its 

argument_cluster_id , role ,and mention to the corresponding lists. 

– If not matched: add as a new argu-ment entry. 

Output Requirements: 

• Provide a detailed analysis. • Then output a JSON object with key: 

– updated_event_cluster : The newly merged event cluster. • No extraneous text in the JSON. 

Input documents and corresponding events: 

{} 

Target event cluster: {} 

Candidate event: {} 

Reasoning stage 2: Event consolidation Task Objective: 

The event cluster constitutes the structured rep-resentation of events at the corpus-level by in-tegrating information from the corresponding document-level events. We aim to fine-tune this structure by correcting errors in the inte-grated information. 

Procedure: 

• Step 1. Identify the corresponding document-level events using the listed 

event_ids .• Step 2. From the triggers list, select one core trigger and remove all others. • Step 3. For each entry in arguments :

– Check relevance: an argument is rel-evant if it factually contributes to the event cluster. 

– If relevant: * Retain the argument. * In its mentions list, choose one core mention and remove the rest. 

– If irrelevant: remove the entire argu-ment entry. 

Document-Level Event Structure: 

Each document-level event has: • event_id : Unique identifier. • trigger : Keyword or phrase. • arguments : List of arguments, each with: 

– argument_id : Unique identifier. 

– mention : Textual expression of the argument. 

Corpus-Level Event Cluster Structure: 

Each cluster has: • EC_id : Unique cluster ID. • event_ids : List of document-level event IDs. • triggers : Concatenated triggers from member events. • arguments : List of merged arguments, each with: 

– mentions : Concatenated mentions from member events. 

Input documents and corresponding events: 19279 {} 

Event cluster: {} 

Output Requirements: 

• Provide a detailed analysis of each step. • Then output a JSON object with the up-dated event cluster under the key: 

– updated_event_cluster : The re-fined cluster structure. • Do not merge arguments; keep the origi-nal cluster schema intact. • The JSON must contain no additional text or notes. 

C.5 A Detailed Running Example of Our Framework Components 

To further clarify the components of our framework, we provide a detailed running example based on the example in Figure 1, demonstrating one iteration of Stage 1 and Stage 2 reasoning. For clarity, we have structured the reasoning process in the form of tables. 

Reasoning Stage I: Event Composition 

Input 1: Existing Event Clusters 

Cluster ID: EC1 

Trigger: injured 

Human Participant: dozens (A777) 

Non-Human Participant: quake (A768) 

Time: Tuesday (A784) 

Location: in a region (A783) 

Cluster ID: EC2 

Trigger: injured 

Human Participant: others (A781) 

Non-Human Participant: quakes (A768) 

Time: Sunday (A764) 

Location: in Papua in easternmost of Indonesia (A848) Input 2: Candidate Event 

Trigger: injuring 

Human Participant: dozens (A777) 

Non-Human Participant: quake (A768) 

Location: across the affected region (A798) Sub-step 1.1: Event-to-cluster Assignment 

Feature: Context EC1: Same event: 6.1-magnitude earthquake in Aceh 

EC2: Different event: Quake in Papua 

Decision: EC1 context aligned 

Feature: Trigger EC1: injuring ≈ injured 

EC2: injuring ≈ injured 

Decision: Both match 

Feature: Human Participant EC1: dozens (A777) 

EC2: others (A781) 

Decision: Exact match with EC1 

Feature: Non-Human Participant EC1: quake (A768) 

EC2: quakes (A768) 

Decision: Shared across both 

Feature: Time EC1: (missing) vs. Tuesday (A784) 

EC2: (missing) vs. Sunday (A764) 

Decision: No contradiction with EC1 

Feature: Location EC1: across the affected region (A798) vs. in a region (A783) 

EC2: across the affected region (A798) vs. Papua (A848) 

Decision: Consistent with EC1 Sub-step 1.2: Merge Candidate Event 

Relevance Level: e (Same news, synonymous triggers, consistent arguments) 

Action: Merge the candidate event into Event Cluster 1 (EC1) 

Sub-step 2: Argument Alignment 

Type: Trigger Mentions: injured, injuring 

LLM Reasoning: “injuring” is a variant form of “injured,” indicating the same event trigger. 

Type: Human Participant Mentions: dozens 

Argument Clusters: A777 

LLM Reasoning: Exact match on mention and cluster ID, confirming identity of human participants. 

Type: Non-Human Participant 19280 Mentions: quake 

Argument Clusters: A768 

LLM Reasoning: Exact match on mention and cluster ID, confirming same non-human participant. 

Type: Location Mentions: in a region, across the affected region 

Argument Clusters: A783, A798 

LLM Reasoning: Mentions are semantically similar; LLM infers they refer to the same location despite different cluster IDs. 

Type: Time Mentions: Tuesday 

Argument Clusters: A784 

LLM Reasoning: Candidate lacks ex-plicit time but does not contradict existing "Tuesday" argument; inferred as same. 

Reasoning Stage II: Event Consolidation 

Event Consolidation 

Component: Trigger Mentions: "injured" (D13_E2), "injuring" (D14_E4) 

Selected: "injured" 

Reasoning: More concise and commonly used; semantically similar to "injuring" 

Component: Argument 1 Mentions: "dozens", "dozens" 

Selected: "dozens" 

Reasoning: Identical mentions; quantify injured people; keep one 

Component: Argument 2 Mentions: "quake", "quake" 

Selected: "quake" 

Reasoning: Identical mentions; refers to cause of injury; keep one 

Component: Argument 3 Mentions: "in a region", "across the affected region" 

Selected: "across the affected region" 

Reasoning: Both relevant, second is more precise; keep more specific mention 

Component: Argument 4 Mentions: "Tuesday" 

Selected: "Tuesday" 

Reasoning: Time argument relevant for event temporal context; retain for completeness 19281 D Case Study 

D.1 Stage 1.1: Event-to-cluster assignment 

An example of event-to-cluster assignment is pre-sented in Table 8. The LLM takes the new candi-date event D7_E1 (“ARRESTS” of “RCMP” and “MEN” in “THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR”) and, in the first event composition phase, recognizes that the uppercase trigger “ARRESTS” is semantically equivalent to the first event cluster’s existing “ar-rested,” aligns “RCMP” and “MEN” with the clus-ter’s “leaders” according to the texts, thereby merg-ing D7_E1 into cluster 1 (Relevance Level e). 

D.2 Stage 1.2: Argument alignment 

An example of argument alignment is given in Ta-ble 9. In the Model Input section, we show (1) the excerpt of the target event cluster—complete with its existing triggers and argument lists—and (2) the new candidate event D7_E1, formatted as nested JSON. In the Model Output section, we first detail the trigger merging step, where “ARRESTS” is appended to the cluster’s triggers, and then the argument merging step, where each D7_E1 argu-ment (“RCMP,” “MEN,” and the Bountiful loca-tion) is aligned and merged into its corresponding cluster entry. The table concludes with the full up-dated_event_cluster JSON, demonstrating how the LLM produces a single, coherent multi-document event representation. 

D.3 Event Consolidation 

An example of event Consolidation is presented in Table 10. The LLM receives as input the ag-gregated cluster—complete with its seven triggers (five instances of “arrested” plus “ARRESTS”) and nine argument mention lists—and, in the Detailed Analysis phase, first selects “arrested” as the sin-gle canonical trigger (removing the variant “AR-RESTS”). It then evaluates each argument men-tion group : retaining “leaders,” “practicing,” “in Canada,” “Wednesday,” “in Bountiful, B.C.,” and “RCMP” as relevant core mentions, and discarding “on Tuesday,” “residents,” and “charges” as incon-sistent or redundant. The table concludes with the final ‘updated_event_cluster’ JSON, showing a streamlined cluster with one trigger and six core arguments. 19282 Model Input: 

Documents and Events (excerpt): Doc 1: . . . ; Events: . . . Doc 2: . . . ; Events: . . . . . . Existing event clusters (excerpt): 

[{ "EC_id": 1, "event_ids": ["D1_E1",. . . ], "triggers": ["arrested","arrested",. . . ], "arguments": [ { "roles": ["human participant",. . . ], "mentions": ["leaders",. . . ], "argument_cluster_ids": [. . . ] }, }, { "EC_id": 2, "event_ids": [. . . ], "triggers": ["polygamy","polygamy",. . . ], "arguments": [. . . ] }, { "EC_id": 3, "event_ids": [. . . ], "triggers": ["arrests"], "arguments": [. . . ] }, { "EC_id": 4, "event_ids": [. . . ], "triggers": ["practicing"], "arguments": [. . . ] }, {. . . } ]]

Candidate event (excerpt): 

{ "event_id": "D7_E1", "trigger": "ARRESTS", "arguments": [ { "argument_id": ". . . ", "role": "human participant", "mention": "MEN" }, { "argument_id": ". . . ", "role": "human participant", "mention": "RCMP" }, { "argument_id": ". . . ", "role": "location", "mention": "THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR" }, {. . . } ] } 

Model Output: Stage 1: Identify the Most Relevant Cluster Context Comparison: 

– The candidate event (D7_E1) reports the arrest of two men (Winston Blackmore and James Oler) from the polygamous community of Bountiful, British Columbia, on charges of polygamy. This aligns closely with the context of existing event cluster 1 (EC_id: 1), which also describes the arrests of the same individuals in the same location (Bountiful, British Columbia) for practicing polygamy. The context is consistent across all documents in cluster 1 and the candidate event. 

Trigger Comparison: 

– The candidate event’s trigger is “ARRESTS” (uppercase, likely due to headline formatting), which is synonymous with “arrested” and “arrests” found in cluster 1 and cluster 3. The semantic meaning is identical, despite minor formatting differences. 

Argument Comparison: 

– Human Participants: The candidate event mentions “RCMP” (A973) and “MEN” (A894). Cluster 1 includes “RCMP” (A890) and “leaders” (A893, A953), which are semantically similar to “MEN” (the men arrested are the leaders). The roles and mentions align well. – Location: The candidate event mentions “THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR” (A916), which is semantically equivalent to “in Bountiful, B.C.” (A926) and “in Canada” (A897, A936) in cluster 1. All refer to the same geographic area. – Non-Human Participants: The candidate event does not explicitly mention a non-human participant, but the context implies the charges are related to polygamy, which is covered in cluster 1’s arguments (“practicing”, “charges”). – Time: The candidate event does not specify a time, but this is not a significant discrepancy given the strong alignment in other arguments. 

Comparison with Other Clusters: 

– Cluster 2 (EC_id: 2) focuses on a different event involving “another member” of the FLDS, which does not match the candidate event’s context or arguments. – Cluster 3 (EC_id: 3) uses the trigger “arrests” but involves “authorities” as the human participant and lacks specific details about Bountiful or the leaders. The context is less aligned. 

Stage 2: Select Relevance Level 

– Same news (arrests of Blackmore and Oler in Bountiful for polygamy). – Synonymous triggers (“ARRESTS” vs. “arrested”). – Matching human participants (RCMP and leaders/men). – Matching location (Bountiful, British Columbia). – No significant differences in time, location, or participants. This fits relevance level e : “Same news, synonymous triggers, and most aspects match.” 

Merge Decision: 

– Merge the candidate event into cluster 1 (EC_id: 1). 

JSON Output: 

{ "decision": "merge", "most_relevant_event_cluster_id": 1 } 

Table 8: LLM I/O in event-to-cluster assignment 19283 Model Input: 

Documents and Events (excerpt): Doc 1: . . . ; Events: . . . Doc 2: . . . ; Events: . . . . . . Target event cluster (excerpt): 

[’EC_id’: 1, ’event_ids’: [’D1_E1’,’D8_E4’,. . . ], ’triggers’: [’arrested’,’arrested’,. . . ], ’arguments’: [’roles’: [’human_participant’,. . . ], ’mentions’: [’leaders’,. . . ], ’argument_cluster_ids’: [. . . ], ’roles’: [’location’,. . . ], ’mentions’: [’in Canada’,. . . ], ’argument_cluster_ids’: [. . . ], ’roles’: [’time’,. . . ], ’mentions’: [’Wednesday’,’Wednesday morning’], ’argument_cluster_ids’: [. . . ], ’roles’: [’location’], ’mentions’: [’in Bountiful , B.C.’], ’argument_cluster_ids’: [. . . ], ’roles’: [’human_participant’], ’mentions’: [’RCMP’], . . . ]] 

Candidate event (excerpt): 

{ "event_id": "D7_E1", "trigger": "ARRESTS", "arguments": [ { "argument_id": ". . . ", "role": "human participant", "mention": "MEN" }, { "argument_id": ". . . ", "role": "location", "mention": "THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR" }, {. . . }] } 

Model Output: Trigger Merging: 

– Candidate Trigger : “ARRESTS” is appended to the existing triggers {“arrested”, . . . }, since they are semantically equivalent. 

Argument Merging: 

1. Argument D7_E1_A1 : mention “RCMP” matches the cluster’s “RCMP” despite differing cluster IDs, so we append its role, mention, and ID. 2. Argument D7_E1_A2 : mention “MEN” is semantically similar to “leaders”/“residents”, so we merge it into that argument entry. 3. Argument D7_E1_A3 : the location mention “THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR” aligns with “in Bountiful, B.C.”, so we merge it accordingly. 

{"updated_event_cluster": { "EC_id": 1, "event_ids": ["D1_E1","D8_E4","D9_E1","D3_E2","D5_E1","D6_E2","D7_E1"], "triggers": ["arrested","arrested","arrested","arrested","arrested","ARRESTS"], "arguments": [ {"roles": ["human participant","human participant","human participant","human participant"], "mentions": ["leaders","leaders","leaders","MEN"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A953","A893","A893","A894"]}, {"roles": ["non_human participant"], "mentions": ["practicing"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A895"]}, {"roles": ["location","location","location"], "mentions": ["in Canada","in Canada","in Canada"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A897","A897","A936"]}, {"roles": ["time","time"], "mentions": ["Wednesday","Wednesday morning"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A903","A903"]}, {"roles": ["location","location"], "mentions": ["in Bountiful , B.C.","THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A926","A916"]}, {"roles": ["human participant","human participant"], "mentions": ["RCMP","RCMP"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A890","A973"]}, {"roles": ["time"], "mentions": ["on Tuesday"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A903"]}, {"roles": ["human participant"], "mentions": ["residents"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A893"]}, {"roles": ["non_human participant"], "mentions": ["charges"], "argument_cluster_ids": ["A913"]}]}} 

Table 9: LLM I/O in argument alignment 19284 Model Input: 

Documents and Events (excerpt): Doc 1: . . . ; Events: . . . Doc 2: . . . ; Events: . . . . . . Event cluster (excerpt): 

’EC_id’: 1, ’event_ids’: [’D1_E1’,’D8_E4’,. . . ], ’triggers’: [’arrested’,’arrested’,. . . ], ’arguments’: [ ’mentions’: [’leaders’,’leaders’,’leaders’,’MEN’], ’mentions’: [’practicing’], ’mentions’: [’in Canada’,’in Canada’,’in Canada’], ’mentions’: [’Wednesday’,’Wednesday morning’], ’mentions’: [’in Bountiful , B.C.’,’THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR’], ’mentions’: [’RCMP’,’RCMP’], ’mentions’: [’on Tuesday’], ’mentions’: [’residents’], ’mentions’: [’charges’] ]

Model Output: Detailed Analysis: 

1. Trigger Selection : “arrested” is chosen as the single core trigger (the most consistent) and all others are removed. 2. Argument Relevance and Mention Selection :• Argument 1 ({’mentions’: [’leaders’,’leaders’,’leaders’,’MEN’]}): retain, choose “leaders”. • Argument 2 ({’mentions’: [’practicing’]}): retain, “practicing”. • Argument 3 ({’mentions’: [’in Canada’,’in Canada’,’in Canada’]}): retain, “in Canada”. • Argument 4 ({’mentions’: [’Wednesday’,’Wednesday morning’]}): retain, “Wednesday”. • Argument 5 ({’mentions’: [’in Bountiful , B.C.’,’THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY OF BOUNTIFUL IN THE BC INTERIOR’]}): retain, “in Bountiful , B.C.”. • Argument 6 ({’mentions’: [’RCMP’,’RCMP’]}): retain, “RCMP”. • Argument 7 ({’mentions’: [’on Tuesday’]}): remove (inconsistent). • Argument 8 ({’mentions’: [’residents’]}): remove (redundant). • Argument 9 ({’mentions’: [’charges’]}): remove (too vague). 

{"EC_id": 1, "event_ids": ["D1_E1","D8_E4","D9_E1","D3_E2","D5_E1","D6_E2","D7_E1"], "triggers": ["arrested"], "arguments": [ {"mentions": ["leaders"]}, {"mentions": ["practicing"]}, {"mentions": ["in Canada"]}, {"mentions": ["Wednesday"]}, {"mentions": ["in Bountiful , B.C."]}, {"mentions": ["RCMP"]} ]}

Table 10: LLM I/O in event consolidation 19285