Title: 2024.acl-long.617.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.617.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 27 Aug 2024 13:06:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 11442–11459 August 11-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Aligning Large Language Models by On-Policy Self-Judgment 

Sangkyu Lee 1,∗ Sungdong Kim 2,3,† Ashkan Yousefpour 1

Minjoon Seo 3 Kang Min Yoo 2,4 Youngjae Yu 1,†

Yonsei University 1 NAVER Cloud 2 KAIST AI 3 SNU AI Center 4

Abstract 

Existing approaches for aligning large language models with human preferences face a trade-off that requires a separate reward model (RM) for on-policy learning. In this paper, we present a novel alignment framework, S ELF -J UDGE 

that (1) does on-policy learning and 2) is pa-rameter efficient, as it does not require an ad-ditional RM for evaluating the samples for on-policy learning. To this end, we propose Judge-augmented Supervised Fine-Tuning (JSFT) to train a single model to act as both a policy and a judge. Specifically, we view the pairwise judgment task, choosing the better response from a response pair, as a special case of the instruction-following task. The resulting model can judge preferences of on-the-fly responses from current policy initialized from itself. Ex-perimental results show the efficacy of S ELF -JUDGE , outperforming baselines in preference benchmarks. We also show that the rejecting sampling by itself can improve performance further without an additional evaluator 1.

1 Introduction 

Research on aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preference has increasingly gained attention in recent years (Askell et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Rafailov et al., 2023). Reinforcement Learning from Hu-man Feedback (RLHF) is the most dominant ap-proach for the alignment of LLMs for human pref-erences (Ziegler et al., 2020). It utilizes a reward model (RM) to estimate the human preference scores for the generated responses from policy. The policy is updated with on-policy Reinforcement Learning (RL) to maximize the estimated rewards of sampled responses regularized with the KL di-vergence between the current policy and reference   

> ∗Work done during internship at NAVER Cloud
> †Corresponding authors
> 1The code is available at github.com/oddqueue/self-judge

A You need to go to a blood donor clinic. Have you read the terms on a website? 

> Feedback with the preference order of on-policy samples by single token prediction

B

A > B 

> Current Policy
> Q: I have never donated blood before. How can I do i t?
> Q: Which is the better?
> Reference Policy

🔥 

Figure 1: In our framework, S ELF -J UDGE , a single model is trained not only to generate responses but also to perform a judgment task, where it selects the better of the two responses through a single token prediction. This enables on-policy self-training by performing judg-ments on current policy for improving itself. 

policy. However, RLHF requires a complex setup for on-policy updates because of its simultaneous use of an RM with the reference model. In contrast, a line of research (Rafailov et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2023) proposes discarding on-policy learning and optimizing from preference orders in static datasets without RMs (i.e., offline 

learning), whereas other studies propose construct-ing datasets with responses sampled from the initial policy and labeled by separated evaluators (i.e., off-policy learning) (Zhao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Gulcehre et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023). However, offline learning can lead to sub-optimal results due to the lack of exploration (Medi-ratta et al., 2023), and off-policy learning could cause degeneration if an appropriate replay buffer strategy is not used (Zhang and Sutton, 2017). In this paper, we present SELF -J UDGE , a simpli-fied on-policy training scheme that trains a single 

model to perform on-the-fly feedback for current 

11442 Augment the SFT dataset by a pairwise judgment task whose instruction is to select the chosen response in a single choice token            

> Prompt Chosen Response Rejected Response
> Train a Judge Model that can act as both policy and judge Sample response pairs from the policy model
> Policy Reference Sample N
> responses from the policy model at inference Construct a tournament tree with oversampled responses Choose the winner of the tournament as a final response Regard the prompt and chosen response from the preference dataset as a training instance for SFT
> Judge
> 1) Judge-augmented Supervised Fine-tuning 2) Self-Training by On-Policy Judgment 3) Self-Rejection by Tournament
> Feedback Policy
> Judge preference orders on sampled responses by the reference model
> :
> :A > B
> Initialize the policy model and fixed reference model by a single Judge Model
> :A,B
> :Reference
> A > B
> Policy Reference
> Policy
> :
> Policy
> :
> ...
> Which is the better?
> SFT Dataset
> A: B:
> ⋯⋯⋮
> Judge each match on the tournament tree Policy
> Preference Dataset
> Augment
> A > B :
> Judge
> Feedback to policy model with predicted preference orders
> 🔥
> 🔥
> 🔥

Figure 2: An overview of S ELF -J UDGE . 1) We train an LLM to act as a Judge Model (JM), which can both generate responses and compare response pairs. We train the JM with a SFT dataset augmented with the pairwise judgment task where the better response can be selected by a single token. 2) We initialize a policy and a fixed reference model from the trained JM. Then, the policy model samples response pairs, and the reference model performs judgments on the pairs for giving feedback with preference orders. 3) We perform a rejection sampling by a tournament on responses from the policy through the judgments by itself for further improvements at inference time. 

policy for improving itself . To this end, we in-troduce Judge-augmented Supervised Fine-tuning (JSFT) to obtain a model that can both generate a re-sponse and perform pairwise comparison, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, we regard the pairwise judgment task, choosing the better response from a response pair, as a special case of the instruction-following task, which can be answered in a single token and optionally with a rationale. S ELF -J UDGE 

initializes the current policy and reference policy from JSFT’s resulting model. S ELF -J UDGE sam-ples a response pair from the current policy and chooses a better response in the pair by the refer-ence policy, then updates the current policy with preference orders without an RM (Rafailov et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2023). Experimental results show that S ELF -J UDGE 

outperforms RLHF and other offline and off-policy approaches (Rafailov et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Gulcehre et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023) on pref-erence benchmarks. Unlike existing approaches, SELF -J UDGE leverages on-policy learning while not introducing an additional evaluator. The re-sults demonstrate the effectiveness and parameter efficiency of S ELF -J UDGE performing on-policy 

self-training for LLM alignment. Furthermore, we show that S ELF -J UDGE can maximize performance through self-rejection that selects the best response from its own responses using its judgment capabil-ities learned through JSFT. In particular, the per-formance gains are significant when the pairwise judgment task of JSFT involves comparisons based on principles with rationale for the decision. In summary, our main contributions are: • We propose a parameter-efficient on-policy learning framework, S ELF -J UDGE , with JSFT for obtaining an initial policy that can judge. • We analyze the efficacy of the JSFT for judg-ment and suggest the best practices to exploit the improved judgment ability. • We show resulting models from JSFT can self-improve by acting as a judge: on-policy self-training and self-rejection at inference time. 

2 Preliminaries 

Aligning by Reinforcement Learning To align LLMs with human preferences, RLHF (Ziegler et al., 2020) follows three stages: 1) obtaining an initial policy πref through SFT from the pre-trained LLM, 2) training an RM from human preference triplets (x, y w, y l), where yw is a chosen response, and yl is a rejected response for a given prompt x,3) fine-tuning the initial policy by Proximal Pol-icy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017), with KL divergence between current policy π and reference policy πref as a regularization for the re-ward maximization objective. Generally, RMs are 11443 trained by Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952), which minimizes negative log-likelihood of score difference, log σ(rθ(x, y w) − rθ(x, y l)) , to compute a pointwise scalar reward for the response sampled from the current policy. This on-policy 

rollout procedure provides the frequent exploration 

of responses but introduces an additional training stage and memory usage due to the RMs. 

Aligning from Preference Orders It has been observed that RM is susceptible to language bi-ases such as the response length, preferring longer responses over shorter ones (Shen et al., 2023). Askell et al. (2021) suggest a language model-ing loss on preferred context (x, y w) during the training of the RM to address this issue. This ap-proach, however, necessitates another pre-training stage of the RM. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) and Sequence Like-lihood Calibration with Human Feedback (SLiC-HF) (Zhao et al., 2023) introduce objectives that can be trained by only preference orders yw ≻ yl

without scalar rewards and need for RMs. How-ever, offline learning methods optimized on static datasets inherently reach sub-optimal results com-pared to online learning (Mediratta et al., 2023). Xu et al. (2023); Yuan et al. (2024) propose an online learning approach that iteratively con-structs datasets by responses sampled from the policy. However, this off-policy approach with a large buffer size can induce performance degenera-tion (Zhang and Sutton, 2017). 

3 SELF -J UDGE 

In this section, we describe our proposed alignment framework, SELF -J UDGE , which utilizes a single 

model that acts as both policy and judge: sampling responses and judgment over response pairs. It can provide feedback on the response pairs sam-pled from the current policy for improving itself in an on-policy manner and also perform rejection sampling by itself, as depicted in Figure 2. 

3.1 Judge Model 

Using LLMs to evaluate responses of another LLM, 

LLM-as-a-judge , is shown promising (Zheng et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022b; Kim et al., 2023). In-spired by these studies, we leverage the genera-tive pairwise evaluator, which we refer to as Judge Model (JM) , for aligning LLMs with human pref-erence (Ethayarajh et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Unlike an RM, which produces User            

> Assistant
> Which response is better when following [principle] ?Prompt: [prompt]
> Response A: [response A]
> Response B: [response B]
> Judgment Template Target Sequence
> Decision: Response [A or B]
> Evaluation of A: [rationale A]
> Evaluation of B: [rationale B]
> Figure 3: An example of a judgment template C. The judgment template asks which of the two responses is better for a given prompt and requests to select the judge token J ∈ {A ,B} corresponding to the better response. Optionally, a principle for the judgment can be added to the judgment template, and the rationale can be included in the target sequence for training.

a scalar score for a single response, JM simply chooses the better response between the two re-sponses. Specifically, the JM π is trained by maximizing the log-likelihood of the judge token 

J ∈ {A , B} corresponding ground-truth prefer-ence label for a given judgment template C. Fig-ure 3 illustrates an example of a judgment template. 

Judge-augmented Supervised Fine-tuning Typ-ically, the chosen response yw is used for tar-get sequence of prompt x in training prefer-ence dataset D on the SFT stage, i.e., DSFT =

{(x, y w)|(x, y w, y l) ∈ D} . In addition, we treat the pairwise judgment task as a spe-cial case of instruction-tuning, e.g., DJudge =

{(C(x, y w, y l), J )|(x, y w, y l) ∈ D} . As a re-sult, we train the pairwise judgment task as a re-sponse generation using the augmented dataset 

D+ 

> SFT

= DSFT ∪ D Judge . We refer to the pro-cess of fine-tuning the LLMs on the augmented dataset D+ 

> SFT

as Judge-augmented Supervised Fine-tuning (JSFT) . With JSFT, we can obtain a JM that can not only compare pairwise prefer-ences but also generate responses. Also, we can expect a better understanding of language-relevant features on preference comparison since the JM is trained to mimic good behavior yw, similar to the observation found on RMs (Askell et al., 2021). 

Principle-aware Judgment with Rationale One advantage of JM compared to the conventional method with RM is that the JM can adapt the judgment template C according to multiple aspects of human preferences, reflecting diverse princi-ples (Sun et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023). Also, 11444 the generative nature of JM makes it easy to uti-lize rationale, the justification for the judgment in natural language, for more precise judgments, similar to the observations on instruction-tuning of LLMs (Mukherjee et al., 2023). For a given principle p ∈ P where the P is a principle set, we devise different judgment templates Cp for each p.Also, we can optionally include a rationale R in the target sequence for the judgment task when it is available. The JM first produces a judge token 

J ∈ {A , B} which corresponds to the ground-truth label of the better response, then rationale 

R is followed. Formally, π(J , R | C p(x, y w, y l)) .As a result, principle-aware judgment can be con-ducted by simply adjusting the judgment template. 

Judging Self-Generated Responses Since JM is trained by JSFT, it can judge its own response by playing the roles of the policy and judge: this is the intuition behind the name SELF -J UDGE . As a policy, the JM first samples responses ya, y b for a given x. Then, the JM, as a judge, chooses a better response between the two responses, π(J | C(x, y a, y b)) . More precisely, it averages the likeli-hoods of corresponding judge tokens, J , utilizing a position-swapped judgment template to mitigate position bias (Chiang et al., 2023). From the rela-tive likelihoods of these judge tokens for each re-sponse, a pseudo-preference triplet label (x, ˆyw, ˆyl)

for the self-training and self-rejection can be de-duced. For the principle-aware judgments, we can first check the winning rate across principles and then the mean likelihood of judge tokens across principles for deciding orders when a tie happens. 

3.2 Self-Training by On-Policy Judgment 

Ethayarajh et al. (2023) uses JM’s predicted like-lihood of judge tokens as the reward for on-policy evaluation in RLHF framework, comparing with a blank baseline response 2. This approach has a significant limitation; the likelihood inferred by a language model cannot be regarded as confidence without calibration (Zhou et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023). Conversely, to leverage JMs properly, we adopt objectives that perform optimizations on pref-erence orders since these objectives do not require pointwise scalar scores (Rafailov et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2023). In our framework, we regard the reference policy πref as a judge to evaluate the preference order between generated 

> 2huggingface.co/stanfordnlp/SteamSHP-flan-t5-xl

samples from current policy πθ, as follows: 

ya ∼ πθ(· | x), y b ∼ πθ(· | x),

(x, ˆyw, ˆyl) ← πref (J | C (x, y a, y b)) .

That is, a single JM with JSFT is initialized for both πθ and πref , but the latter one is frozen for the likelihood normalization (Liu et al., 2023) and on-policy judgments. This setup enjoys on-policy 

learning without introducing an additional model for the evaluation as RLHF. If we adopt the DPO objective, the following loss is used for optimiza-tion, where σ is the sigmoid function, and β is a coefficient for KL divergence regularization, 

−E[ log σ(β log πθ(ˆ yw|x)

πref (ˆ yw|x) − β log πθ(ˆ yl|x)

πref (ˆ yl|x)

)] .

3.3 Self-Rejection by Tournament 

RMs can also be utilized at inference time for re-jection sampling such as Best-of-N sampling (Sti-ennon et al., 2020), selecting the best response according to the reward score among oversampled 

N responses. However, this approach requires a separate RM in addition to the policy model during inference. In contrast, JM trained within SELF -J UDGE does not require an additional RM for evaluating responses, as it can evaluate the self-generated responses by itself. However, judging all the possible comparison pairs to get the average winning rate requires 

O(N 2) forward passes for (N

> 2

) comparisons. Thus, we adopt the tournament (Zhao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) for rejection sampling at inference time. We construct a tournament tree whose leaf nodes are sampled responses, and the non-leaf nodes are chosen by the winner on judgment be-tween the child nodes. Since the tournament tree has less than N − 1 non-leaf nodes, we can find the best response by O(N ) forward passes, the same as the Best-of-N sampling with a separated RM. 

4 Experimental Setup 

In this section, we discuss the experimental setup for validating our proposed framework, S ELF -JUDGE . We use two datasets: Anthropic-HH (Yuan et al., 2023) and UltraFeedback (Cui et al., 2023). In the experiments, we choose DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), RSO (Liu et al., 2023), ReST (Gul-cehre et al., 2023), RAFT (Dong et al., 2023), and RLHF (Ziegler et al., 2020) as baselines for compar-ing with S ELF -J UDGE . We evaluate the resulting 11445 Method Policy Evaluator On-Policy Learning On-Memory Parameters AlpacaEval                                                        

> (% Win)
> VicunaEval
> (% Win)
> MT-Bench
> (Score)
> SFT ✗✗✗p24.75 50.00 4.63 DPO SFT ✗✗2p35.14 60.63 4.73 RSO SFT JM ✗2p34.27 64.38 4.42 ReST SFT RM ✗p27.43 55.00 4.53 RAFT SFT RM ✗p32.50 59.38 4.43 RLHF SFT RM ✓3p33.46 53.75 4.29
> SELF -J UDGE
> (Ours) JM ✓2p44.88 76.25 4.80
> Table 1: Evaluation results of models trained on HH-Helpful (Bai et al., 2022a). The best result and second best result on each benchmark are represented as bold and underline. We report theoretical memory usage of model parameters required for each method where pdenotes the number of parameters of the base model. We use base
> and online splits but used the online split only for constructing the training instances of SFT. S ELF -J UDGE
> outperforms baselines on all benchmarks with a single JM, which can act as both policy and judge.

models from each experiment by AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023), VicunaEval (Chiang et al., 2023), and MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023). The implementa-tion details are in Appendix A. 

4.1 Datasets Anthropic-HH Anthropic-HH (Bai et al., 2022a) is a human preference dataset on 170k dialogues, which consists of two subsets, HH-Helpful and HH-Harmless, which are labeled by the helpfulness and harmlessness principle. We focus on the HH-Helpful to better isolate and understand the benefits of S ELF -J UDGE due to the conflicting nature of helpfulness and harmlessness principles (Bai et al., 2022a). HH-Helpful contains various data splits corresponding to the development stages of an AI assistant. We use the base split and include the pair (x, y w) from the online split in the SFT dataset for analyzing transition effects on JSFT. 

UltraFeedback As obtaining human-labeled feedback is costly, utilizing AI feedback is a widely investigated alternative (Bai et al., 2022b; Sun et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023). UltraFeedback (Cui et al., 2023) is one of the datasets that consists of AI feedback where GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) rates re-sponses obtained from four different language mod-els for the 64k prompts, based on four principles of helpfulness, instruction-following, truthfulness, and honesty. Each rating contains the rationale obtained from GPT-4, which represents an explana-tion for the quality and rating of the corresponding response based on the given principle. We ran-domly split 10% of the prompts of the dataset and use them as a test set for further analysis. 

4.2 Baselines 

We choose DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) as an offline learning baseline and use DPO objective for self-training in S ELF -J UDGE . We include RSO (Liu et al., 2023) with the DPO objective as an off-policy learning baseline, which utilizes the JM as a separate evaluator. We include baselines that utilize RMs, ReST (Gulcehre et al., 2023) and 

RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) for off-policy learn-ing approach and RLHF (Ziegler et al., 2020) for on-policy learning approach. We choose Llama-2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) as a base model for all experiments for fair comparisons. 

4.3 Evaluations 

We evaluate the resulting models based on the three benchmarks, AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023), VicunaE-val (Chiang et al., 2023), and MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023). AlpacaEval is an alignment bench-mark that compares the quality of two responses on 805 questions sampled from a diverse dataset, rated by GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). We use the 

text-davinci-003 (Ouyang et al., 2022) as the baseline model for measuring winning rates. 

VicunaEval is another benchmark utilizing GPT-4 as a judge for comparing two models’ responses from 80 questions on various topics. We use the SFT model on each dataset as the baseline model for measuring winning rates. MT-Bench is a multi-turn benchmark consisting of 80 instances of 2-turn questions from 8 different domains, which is evalu-ated by GPT-4 on a scale of 1 from 10. We report the average scores obtained on each turn. 11446 5 Experimental Results 

5.1 Main Results SELF -J UDGE is a strong alignment method. In Table 1, we can see that S ELF -J UDGE outperforms all baselines. Notably, S ELF -J UDGE consistently shows the highest performance on all three bench-marks while not introducing additional parameters compared to DPO, which is trained in an offline setting. In addition, S ELF -J UDGE also shows sig-nificant strength compared to all of the baselines utilizing separate evaluators for off-policy and on-policy learning (Liu et al., 2023; Gulcehre et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Ziegler et al., 2020). Qual-itative examples can be found in Appendix B. 

5.2 Analysis of Judge Models 

We conduct an ablation study with HH-Helpful to verify two hypotheses about S ELF -J UDGE : 1) JSFT improves JM’s judgment ability, and 2) JM is more compatible with direct preference optimiza-tion than RL. To this end, we train three JMs with different strategies: 1) training solely on judgment task induced from base split, 2) JSFT on base 

split, and 3) JSFT on base split with additional SFT data from online split. We report the per-formance of each JM as a policy and a judge. We further examine the resulting models on RLHF re-garding the predicted likelihood of label tokens on JM as rewards similar to Ethayarajh et al. (2023). We also investigate how different sampling strate-gies in self-training influence the final performance. 

JSFT improves JM’s judgment ability. Table 2 shows the results regarding the first hypothesis. We can see that JM has only a marginal difference in prediction accuracy on the test split of HH-Helpful compared to RM when it is not trained by JSFT. From this observation, we confirm that the transi-tion effects of imitation learning to judgment task occur when the judgment task is trained with canon-ical SFT tasks. On the other hand, including the 

online split for JSFT significantly improves the performance as a policy, but performance as a judge is slightly decreased compared to the JM that is only trained on the base split. We conjecture that the distribution gap between online split and base split influences the transition effects, as 

online split is obtained from a language model already aligned with human preferences. 

On-policy learning with preference orders is the best strategy for JM. In Table 3, we observe that 

Type JSFT  

> (+ DSFT )

Judge 

> (% Accuracy)

Policy 

> (% Win)

RM ✗ 66.11 ✗

JM 

✗ 66.49 ✗

+ base 68.32 5.78 + base / online 67.84 20.26 

> Table 2: Prediction accuracy on test split of HH-Helpful and winning rate on AlpacaEval using JM as a judge or a policy. JSFT improves not only the performance as a policy but also the performance as a judge of JM.

RLHF with JM as an evaluator results in a lower performance compared to conventional RM pro-ducing scalar rewards, which implies that the judge token likelihood obtained from a judgment could not be regarded as a pointwise preference score on the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952). Table 4 shows that on-policy learning outperforms offline and off-policy learning approaches using a single JM on self-training. Therefore, we can conclude that on-policy learning with preference orders, such as DPO objective, is the best strategy for JM in order to leverage JM’s superior perfor-mance on judgments compared to the RM.               

> Policy Evaluator JSFT
> (+ DSFT )
> AlpacaEval
> (% Win)
> SFT RM ✗33.46
> JM
> ✗26.18 +base 29.63 +base /online 28.46
> Table 3: Evaluation results of models trained with dif-ferent evaluator types for RLHF. With JMs, we regard the likelihood of judge token comparing with chosen re-sponse ywas a reward 3. JM’s token likelihoods are not appropriate for the pointwise reward function in RLHF.

5.3 Effects of Principle and Rationale 

In this subsection, we compare JMs trained by three different JSFT strategies to verify the effect of principle-aware judgment and rationale through Ul-traFeedback (Cui et al., 2023). The three different strategies include 1) judgment derived from over-all scores across the principles, 2) principle-aware judgments, and 3) principle-aware judgments with rationales. We check the performance of each JM as a policy and a judge. We also examine how principle-aware judgment and rationale affect the performance as a judge after a self-training stage.   

> 3We found that using the blank response fails on the as-sessment of response since the reward is always close to 1.

11447 Type AlpacaEval          

> (% Win)
> VicunaEval
> (% Win)
> MT-Bench
> (Score)
> Offline 28.57 58.75 4.68 Off-Policy 32.03 64.38 4.59 On-Policy 44.88 76.25 4.80
> Table 4: Effect of learning strategy on self-training. On-policy learning yields the best performance.

We further report the statistics of selected responses on self-rejection according to the sampled number of responses. Additionally, we investigate the fea-sibility of iterative training, which regards the JM after the self-training as the initial policy and con-ducts several iterations of self-training. 

Type P R Judge 

> (% Accuracy)

Policy 

> (% Win)

RM ✗ ✗ 79.9 ✗

JM ✗ ✗ 80.5 67.4 

JM-P ✓ ✗ 81.6 59.3 JM-PR ✓ ✓ 84.0 65.7 

> Table 5: Performance as a judge or a policy by test split of UltraFeedback and AlpacaEval according to the usage of principle ( P) and rationale ( R) for pairwise judgment task. Principle-aware judgment with ratio-nale (JM-PR) boosts the performance as a judge while slightly sacrificing the ability as a policy.

Involving principles and rationale improves JM’s performance as a judge but not as a policy. 

Table 5 shows that JM’s performance as a judge in-creases when the JM is trained for principle-aware judgment (JM-P), and it increases more when the rationale is also used for training (JM-PR). This confirms that the pairwise judgment task can be treated as instruction, inheriting the benefits of instruction-tuning. However, we observe that de-generation in JM’s performance as a policy occurs when JM is trained solely on principle-aware judg-ment but recovered when JM is trained with ratio-nale. We presume this trade-off comes from the bias in task distribution caused by increased pair-wise judgment task instances for training principle-aware judgment. However, we speculate that ratio-nale can mitigate performance degradation caused by response distribution mismatch between the pair-wise judgment task and other tasks. 

JM-PR excels in self-improvement. In Table 6, we can observe that JM-PR achieves comparable performance on benchmarks even though JM-PR shows the degradation as an initial policy model in Table 5. When self-rejection is applied for JM-PR, the winning rate on AlpacaEval is reliably im-proved up to 8.4% with shorter response lengths and fewer repetitions compared to JM as Figure 4 although LLM-as-a-judge is likely to prefer longer responses (Zheng et al., 2023). We further experi-ment with an iterative training scheme that regards the JM-PR after self-training as an initial policy. We observe that the performance as a policy im-proves while the capability as a judge is maintained, as shown in Figure 5. We find that the increase in performance as a policy diminishes with more itera-tions, but the performance degeneration as an initial policy can be overcome with iterative training. 

Method AlpacaEval 

> (% Win)

MT-Bench 

> (Score)

SFT 68.99 5.08 DPO 80.25 5.74 RSO 77.67 5.69 ReST 72.95 5.47 RAFT 71.08 5.32 RLHF 71.68 5.40 SELF -J UDGE (JM) 80.75 6.00 

+ Self-Rejection ( N = 16) 84.47 6.08 SELF -J UDGE (JM-PR) 79.98 6.12 

+ Self-Rejection ( N = 16) 88.39 6.14    

> Table 6: Evaluation results of models trained on Ul-traFeedback by AlpacaEval and MT-Bench. The best result and second best result without a rejection sam-pling are represented as bold and underline. Note that applying self-rejection on resulted models from S ELF -JUDGE does not require a separate evaluator.

6 Related Work 

Learning from Preference Scores There are several approaches utilizing an RM for align-ment learning. RLHF (Ziegler et al., 2020) uti-lizes an RM for on-policy reinforcement learning. RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023) maximizes the margin of log-likelihood by the rank of responses deter-mined by the score from RM and human annotators. RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) and ReST (Gulcehre et al., 2023) apply rejection sampling on sampled responses through the RM to perform self-imitation learning. SALMON (Sun et al., 2023) trains LLMs to generate scores for responses through principle-driven synthetic preference data utilizing the SFT model. However, all these approaches require a 11448 1 2 4 8 16 N80 82 84 86 88 Winning Rate (%)              

> 1 2 4816 N1500 1600 1700 Response Length
> 1 2 4816 N0.09 0.10 0.11 4-grams Repetition
> JM JM-PR Figure 4: Winning rate, average response length, and 4-gram repetition on AlpacaEval according to the number of sampling ( N) for self-rejection on JM and JM-PR after self-training. Even though LLM-as-a-judge tends to favor verbose responses (Zheng et al., 2023), JM-PR reliably improves the winning rate as Nincreases, with smoother increments of response lengths and lower repetitions compared to JM. 123Iteration 75 80 85 90 Winning Rate (%) N = 1 N = 16
> Figure 5: Result of iterative self-training on AlpacaEval using JM-PR. Performance as a policy increases as it-erations proceed without losing the capacity as a judge for applying self-rejection.

separate RM for the alignment procedure. 

Optimizing on Preference Orders From pref-erence orders in the static dataset, DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) optimizes LLMs by implicit rewards without a separated RM. IPO (Azar et al., 2023) proposes a modified objective using an unbounded preference mapping function to mitigate overfit-ting on deterministic preferences in the dataset. PCO (Xu et al., 2023) utilizes cringe loss for op-timization, which considers the token-level likeli-hood of rejected samples as contrastive training. SPIN (Chen et al., 2024) performs iterative train-ing considering the distribution gap between SFT datasets and the model’s responses as preference orders. Self-Rewarding Language Models (Yuan et al., 2024) trains LLMs to generate scores for a given response by chain-of-thought reasoning to construct preference datasets by self-generated re-sponses. All these approaches differ from our work in that they do not perform on-policy learning. 

Generative Pairwise Evaluator The generative pairwise evaluator, which we refer to as JM, has been utilized in previous approaches to alignment learning. ILF (Scheurer et al., 2023) selects the response that reflects human-requested feedback through JM. SLiC-HF (Zhao et al., 2023) con-structs a static preference dataset with responses obtained from the SFT model ordered by JM. RSO (Liu et al., 2023) approximates the opti-mal policy of the RLHF objective with rejection sampling through JM’s judge token likelihood. OAIF (Guo et al., 2024) adopts pre-aligned LLMs to perform the pairwise judgment task for on-policy learning, not by fine-tuning to JM. All of these ap-proaches focus on utilizing a separate evaluator and do not address self-improvement. 

7 Discussion 

Concurrent Works Recent works such as Self-Rewarding Language Models (Yuan et al., 2024) and OAIF (Guo et al., 2024) have intersections with S ELF -J UDGE in aspects of self-training and on-policy learning for pairwise preferences. Self-Rewarding Language Models trains the initial pol-icy to act as a judge, but evaluations are per-formed through chain-of-thought reasoning, which requires a significant computational cost for eval-uation. Therefore, off-policy learning with an it-erative training scheme was adopted, which can yield inferior results compared to on-policy learn-ing, as shown in Table 4. OAIF similarly utilizes a large language model as a judge for on-policy learn-ing but employs an already aligned large language 11449 Method Self-Training On-Policy         

> Self-Rewarding LMs
> (Yuan et al., 2024) ✓✗
> OAIF
> (Guo et al., 2024) ✗✓
> SELF -J UDGE
> (Ours) ✓✓
> Table 7: Comparison between S ELF -J UDGE and recent concurrent works on preference alignment learning. Un-like the others, S ELF -J UDGE achieves both self-training without separated evaluators and on-policy learning.

model as the judge. This necessitates a superior aligned language model and incurs additional com-putational resources compared to this work, which performs self-improvement using a single model. Table 7 illustrates the difference between these ap-proaches compared to S ELF -J UDGE .

Effects of Parameter Size on JSFT Gao et al. (2023) demonstrates that scaling of parameter size enhances the robustness of RMs in the sense of proxy for the ground truth reward. Similarly, we believe parameter size might significantly affect JMs since they act as a proxy for pairwise human preferences. Table 8 shows that as the parameter size increases, the performance of JM increases without JSFT, but the performance gain from JSFT grows correspondingly as parameter size increases. This implies that the transition effects of imitation learning to judgment task positively correlate with parameter size. Therefore, S ELF -J UDGE has the additional advantage of obtaining a strong evaluator from the overparameterization of the policy model, since JSFT directly leads the scaling of the initial policy to the scaling of the evaluator. 

Model JSFT Judge 

> (% Accuracy)

Policy 

> (% Win)

Llama-2-7B ✗ 66.11 ✗✓ 67.84 20.26 Llama-2-13B ✗ 66.86 ✗✓ 72.13 24.00    

> Table 8: Prediction accuracy on test split of HH-Helpful and winning rate on AlpacaEval with different sizes of base model’s parameter size for JMs. We use base and
> online splits of HH-Helpful for JSFT.

Policy Model as a Judge for Self-Training The reference model is regarded as a judge for the pol-icy model on the self-training by default in S ELF -JUDGE . This corresponds to the assumption of a static environment during a single iteration of the self-training stage. On the other hand, Figure 5 shows the policy model’s capacity as a judge re-mained after the self-training stage. This implies that self-training can be conducted even in a dy-namic environment by regarding the policy model as a judge whose judgment capability may be im-proved during the self-training process. However, we find that the policy model as a judge yields slightly lower performances compared to the ref-erence model, as shown in Table 9. Therefore, we can conclude that the static evaluator has benefits in the performance, while the dynamic evaluator still can be utilized with comparable performance. 

Policy Evaluator AlpacaEval 

> (% Win)

MT-Bench 

> (Score)

JM 

✗ 20.26 4.19 

πθ 42.38 4.67 

πref 44.88 4.80     

> Table 9: Evaluation results of models trained on HH-Helpful with different strategies on a judge for the self-training stage. It shows that slight degeneration happens when utilizing the policy model πθas a judge compared to the reference model πref as a judge.

8 Conclusion 

We propose a parameter-efficient on-policy pref-erence alignment framework, S ELF -J UDGE , intro-ducing Judge-augmented Supervised Fine-tuning (JSFT). A model trained by JSFT can perform feed-back to the current policy for improving itself by acting as a judge. This self-training does not re-quire additional training stages and parameters for a reward model during the policy updates. Our re-sulting model outperforms RLHF, offline, and off-policy baselines in preference benchmarks, demon-strating the advantages of on-policy learning and parameter efficiency of S ELF -J UDGE . Besides, we provide various analyses on the best configurations and efficacy of the proposed JSFT. Specifically, JSFT boosts performance as a judge, and involv-ing comparisons based on principle with rationale about decision leads to further improvement. This enhanced judging capability leads to further self-improvement as a policy at inference time by self-rejection over the model’s own responses. 11450 Limitations 

To achieve parameter-efficient on-policy self-training, S ELF -J UDGE assumes the presence of a human preference dataset of examples for pairwise judgment tasks on JSFT. Therefore, if human pref-erence datasets (Bai et al., 2022a) or strong teacher models for constructing AI Feedback datasets (Cui et al., 2023) are not available, S ELF -J UDGE can not be utilized. This means that S ELF -J UDGE has a limitation compared to self-alignment approaches that can construct a preference dataset when there is no preference dataset at all (Bai et al., 2022b; Sun et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024). Additionally, our experiments do not focus on safety. Thus, us-ing S ELF -J UDGE without reviewing safety guards may lead to potentially inappropriate responses. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was partly supported by an IITP grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIT) (No. RS-2020-II201361, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Yonsei University)) and the Na-tional Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. RS-2024-00354218). The authors thank the members of NAVER Cloud and Yonsei University for their constructive comments. We are also grateful to Seungju Han for valuable discussions and helpful feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. 

References 

Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. 2021. A general language assistant as a laboratory for align-ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861 .Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Michal Valko, and Rémi Munos. 2023. A general theoret-ical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12036 .Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. 2022a. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 .Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. 2022b. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 .Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. 1952. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324– 345. Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. 2024. Self-play fine-tuning con-verts weak language models to strong language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335 .Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2023. Ultrafeedback: Boosting lan-guage models with high-quality feedback. Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and Tong Zhang. 2023. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767 .Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. 2023. Understanding dataset difficulty with V-usable information. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR. Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. 2023. Scal-ing laws for reward model overoptimization. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10835–10866. PMLR. Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srini-vasan, Ksenia Konyushkova, Lotte Weerts, Abhishek Sharma, Aditya Siddhant, Alex Ahern, Miaosen Wang, Chenjie Gu, et al. 2023. Reinforced self-training (rest) for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998 .Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre Rame, Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, et al. 2024. Direct language model alignment from online ai feed-back. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792 .Tom Hosking, Phil Blunsom, and Max Bartolo. 2023. Human feedback is not gold standard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16349 .Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adap-tation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 .11451 Seungone Kim, Jamin Shin, Yejin Cho, Joel Jang, Shayne Longpre, Hwaran Lee, Sangdoo Yun, Seongjin Shin, Sungdong Kim, James Thorne, et al. 2023. Prometheus: Inducing fine-grained evalua-tion capability in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08491 .Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Al-pacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following models. https://github.com/ tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval .Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J Liu, and Jialu Liu. 2023. Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06657 .Ishita Mediratta, Qingfei You, Minqi Jiang, and Roberta Raileanu. 2023. The generalization gap in offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05742 .Subhabrata Mukherjee, Arindam Mitra, Ganesh Jawa-har, Sahaj Agarwal, Hamid Palangi, and Ahmed Awadallah. 2023. Orca: Progressive learning from complex explanation traces of gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02707 .OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27730–27744. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290 .Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Tomasz Korbak, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan Perez. 2023. Training language models with language feedback at scale. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proxi-mal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Wei Shen, Rui Zheng, Wenyu Zhan, Jun Zhao, Shihan Dou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. 2023. Loose lips sink ships: Mitigating length bias in re-inforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05199 .Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-ing to summarize with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:3008– 3021. Zhiqing Sun, Yikang Shen, Hongxin Zhang, Qinhong Zhou, Zhenfang Chen, David Cox, Yiming Yang, and Chuang Gan. 2023. Salmon: Self-alignment with principle-following reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05910 .Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open founda-tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 .Jing Xu, Andrew Lee, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Jason Weston. 2023. Some things are more cringe than others: Preference optimization with the pairwise cringe loss. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16682 .Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason Weston. 2024. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020 .Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. 2023. Rrhf: Rank responses to align language models with human feed-back without tears. Shangtong Zhang and Richard S Sutton. 2017. Adeeper look at experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01275 .Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. 2023. Slic-hf: Se-quence likelihood calibration with human feedback. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425 .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Kaitlyn Zhou, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2023. Navigating the grey area: How expressions of uncertainty and overconfidence affect language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 5506–5524. Chiwei Zhu, Benfeng Xu, Quan Wang, Yongdong Zhang, and Zhendong Mao. 2023. On the calibra-tion of large language models and alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13240 .Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Chris-tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. 2020. Fine-tuning lan-guage models from human preferences. 11452 A Implementation Details 

A.1 Pre-processing of Datasets Target HH-Helpful UltraFeedback 

SFT 65842 57569 Preference 43835 57266  

> (+ Principle)

✗ 202887 

> Table 10: The number of training examples in each dataset according to the target datasets.

For the HH-Helpful 4 (Bai et al., 2022a), we parse only the content of each turn through the role header in the dataset itself. During this process, if a role header exists redundantly (e.g., Human: Assistant: [content] ), we remove all subsequent headers. We perform the roll-out procedures from the last assistant turn in each dialogue. For the UltraFeedback 5 (Cui et al., 2023), we use the mean score across principles as the overall rank of the responses. We choose the longer response as a better response when we have a tie (Hosking et al., 2023). We randomly sample one response as a rejected response yl that is inferior in rank or score on each principle for principle-aware judgment. When a rationale is utilized in training, we remove responses that include a comparative explanation against other responses. Table 10 shows the number of resulted training examples on each dataset after the described pre-processing. 

A.2 Hyperparameters Hyperparameters Initial Feedback 

Epoch 1 3Batch Size 128 64 Learning Rate 2e-5 5e-6 LR Scheduler cosine constant Warm-up Ratio 0.03 0.1 Temperature ✗ 1.0 Top-p ✗ 0.9 Max New Tokens ✗ 768 Optimizer AdamW 

(β1, β 2) (0.9, 0.999) Gradient Clipping 1.0 Max Sequence Length 2048 

LoRA 

(r, α) (8, 16) Dropout 0.1 

RLHF 

Mini-batch Size 32 Inner Epochs 1KL Scheduler (0.2, 6.0) 

ReST 

τ [0.7, 0.8, 0.9] 

DPO, RSO, S ELF -J UDGE 

β 0.1    

> Table 11: Hyperparameters of the experiments. Initial refers to the value of hyperparameters for SFT, RM, and JM.
> Feedback refers the value of hyperparameters for baselines and S ELF -J UDGE .

We apply ReST (Gulcehre et al., 2023) with G = 1 , I = 3 , regarding a single step of Improve step as one epoch of training and τ as a quantile threshold on reward distribution. We sample 8 responses per prompt for RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) and RSO (Liu et al., 2023). We randomly choose one of the sampled responses as a baseline response for JMs and accepted a maximum of 1 response per prompt for RSO. We do not conduct a hyperparameter search. Table 11 shows hyperparameters used in the experiments. 

> 4huggingface.co/datasets/Anthropic/hh-rlhf, MIT License, Copyright (c) 2022 Anthropic
> 5huggingface.co/datasets/openbmb/UltraFeedback, MIT License, Copyright (c) 2023 THUNLP

11453 A.3 Training Details 

We perform full fine-tuning to obtain the initial policy and evaluators, RM or JM initializing from Llama-2-7B 6 (Touvron et al., 2023). We apply LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) for computational efficiency of fine-tuning the baselines and S ELF -J UDGE . We calculate language modeling loss on responses of assistant for SFT and sequences after the judgment template C for the judgment task. We train JM with both position-swapped comparisons on the judgment template for given triplet (x, y w, y l) to avoid position bias (Zheng et al., 2023). We use the prompt x used on the pairwise preference comparison for roll-out procedures. Every experiment is conducted with a maximum of 8 NVIDIA A100 80GB VRAM GPUs for up to 90 hours. The baselines are implemented based on the Transformers 7, PEFT 8 and TRL 9 library. 

A.4 Evaluation Details 

We use the checkpoints from the end of training for evaluation without any model selections on every method. Since VicunaEval (Chiang et al., 2023) and MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023) contain question types that are forced to use greedy decoding in the pre-defined configuration for each benchmark, we only apply the self-rejection on questions that do not require the greedy decoding on evaluation. 

A.5 Prompt Templates          

> <|system|> {system message} <|user|> {prompt at turn 1} <|assistant|> {response at turn 1}[EOS] <|user|> {prompt at turn 2} <|assistant|> {response at turn 2}[EOS]
> · · ·

Table 12: The dialogue template for the experiments.                             

> HH-Helpful
> Below are a series of dialogues between a human user and an AI assistant. The AI tries to be helpful, harmless, and honest.
> UltraFeedback
> Below are a series of dialogues between a human user and an AI assistant. The AI tries to be helpful, honest, truthful and follows the instructions from human.

Table 13: The default system messages for each dataset. 

Table 12 shows the dialogue template used for the experiments and Table 13 shows default system messages used for each dataset. We use the default system message for both training and inference on HH-Helpful. In the case of UltraFeedback, we use a custom system prompt for the chosen response in the dataset when constructing training examples. We use the default system prompt for training on the judgment task and inference. For the judgment template C, we use the template shown in Table 14 for HH-Helpful and the template shown in Table 15 for UltraFeedback. For the principle-aware judgments on UltraFeedback, we modify the guidance about principles as a system prompt as shown in Table 16 (Cui et al., 2023). We use the principle-aware judgment template Cp shown in Table 17 and slightly modify this when rationale R is included in the training, as shown in Table 18. 

> 6huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b, LLAMA 2 Community License, Copyright (c) 2023 Meta Platforms
> 7github.com/huggingface/transformers
> 8github.com/huggingface/peft
> 9github.com/huggingface/trl

11454 <|system|> {default system message} <|user|> Which is the more helpful, harmless, and honest assistant from a given context? Context: -----User: {prompt at turn 1} Assistant: {responses at turn 1} 

· · · 

User: {prompt at turn N} -----Assistant A: {responses A at turn N} Assistant B: {responses B at turn N} Please choose either A or B. <|assistant|> Sure! The option which is more helpful, harmless, and honest would be Assistant {Aor B}

Table 14: The judgment template C for HH-Helpful. The target sequence for the training judgment task is in bold. The default system message is shown in Table 13. 

<|system|> {default system message} <|user|> Which is the better response to be an assistant who is helpful, honest, truthful and following the given instruction from user? Instruction: -----{prompt} -----Response A: -----{response A} -----Response B: -----{response B} -----Please choose either A or B. <|assistant|> Sure! The option which is more helpful, honest, truthful and following the given instruction from user would be Response {A or B }

Table 15: The judgment template C for UltraFeedback. The target sequence for the training judgment task is in bold. The default system message is shown in Table 13. 11455 Helpfulness 

Under the principle of ’helpfulness’, the assistant should provide users with accurate, relevant, and up-to-date information, ensuring that the content is positive, interesting, engaging, educational, and helpful. 

Honesty 

Under the principle of ’honesty’, the assistant should be honest about whether it knows the answer and express its uncertainty explicitly. The assistant should confident on questions it knows well and be modest on those it is unfamiliar with using weakeners such as ’I guess’, ’I suppose’, ’probably’, and ’perhaps’ to express uncertainty. 

Instruction Following 

Under the principle of ’instruction following’, the assistant should align the output with intent of instruction, by understanding the task goal (intended outcome) and restrictions (text styles, format or designated methods, etc.). 

Truthfulness 

Under the principle of ’truthfulness’, the assistant should answer truthfully and be faithful to factual knowledge as well as given contexts, never making up any new facts that aren’t true or cannot be grounded in the instruction. 

Table 16: The principle-aware system messages for UltraFeedback. 

<|system|> {principle-aware system message} <|user|> Which is the better response for an assistant when following the principle of ’{principle}’ for a given instruction? Instruction: -----{prompt} -----Response A: -----{response A} -----Response B: -----{response B} -----Please choose either A or B according to the principle of ’{principle}’. <|assistant|> Sure! The option which is better guided by the principle of ’{principle}’ would be Response {A or B }

Table 17: The principle-aware judgment template Cp for UltraFeedback. The target sequence for the training judgment task is in bold. The principle-aware system messages are shown in Table 16. 11456 <|system|> {principle-aware system message} <|user|> Which is the better response for an assistant when following the principle of ’{principle}’ for a given instruction? Instruction: -----{prompt} -----Response A: -----{response A} -----Response B: -----{response B} -----Please choose either A or B and evaluate each response according to the principle of ’{principle}’. <|assistant|> Sure! Here is the decision of better response and evaluations of each response, guided by the principle of ’{principle}’. Decision: Response {A or B}

Evaluation of Response A: {rationale A} Evaluation of Response B: {rationale B} 

Table 18: The principle-aware judgment template Cp when rationale R is included in UltraFeedback. The target sequence for the training judgment task is in bold. 11457 B Qualitative Examples 

We compare responses of the resulting models from baseline and S ELF -J UDGE trained on HH-Helpful. We further compare the difference after self-training between JM and JM-PR on UltraFeedback by the results of self-rejection to understand the effects of principle-aware judgment and rationale. In Table 19, we observe that S ELF -J UDGE provides richer information requested by the prompt compared to other baselines. Furthermore, we confirm that JM is likely to select a response that contains unnecessarily verbose sentences as the best response compared to JM-PR, as shown in Table 20. 

Prompt 

what is the name of chris tucker first movie 

DPO 

The name of Chris Tucker’s first movie is “Friday”. It was released in 1995. The movie was written by Tucker and Ice Cube, and also stars Ice Cube and Nia Long. 

RSO 

Chris Tucker’s first major film role was in the 1995 comedy film “Friday”. He also had roles in “The Fifth Element” and “Money Train”. His most famous films include “Rush Hour”, “The Best Man”, and “Rush Hour 2”. 

ReST 

The name of Chris Tucker’s first movie was “Friday”. 

RAFT 

The name of Chris Tucker’s first movie is “Friday”, which was released in 1995. 

RLHF 

His first film was "Friday", released in 1995. The film was a great success, and helped launch him to fame. It earned him a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy, and received critical acclaim. It is considered a classic modern comedy movie, and has become a cult film. A sequel was released in 2007, and a third film in the franchise is planned for 2017. 

SELF -J UDGE 

The first movie that Chris Tucker starred in was the 1995 comedy film “Friday”, directed by F. Gary Gray. The film is a classic urban comedy, centering around the adventures of two friends, played by Tucker and Ice Cube, as they spend the day hanging out in their Los Angeles neighborhood. The film was a breakout hit for Tucker, establishing him as a prominent comedic actor, and was followed by asuccessful sequel in 1997. Tucker then went on to star in several major Hollywood films, including the hit comedy films “Boomerang” and “Tommy” as well as the drama “Rush Hour” and its sequels. He has also had a successful career as a stand-up comedian, performing sold-out shows worldwide. 

Table 19: The response examples of resulting models from each method on AlpacaEval. 11458 Prompt 

Take a look at the contract and extract the parties of the agreement from it. As of the 13th day of December 2021, this Music Recording Agreement ("Agreement") is made between Good Kid, a Toronto-based musical group ("Artist"), and Universal Music Group, a record label with license number 545345 ("Record Label"). The Artist and the Recording Label may be referred to in this Agreement individually as "Parties" and collectively as "Parties." Work under this Agreement will begin on March 15, 2022, and will last for the duration of the Agreement. 

JM ( N = 1) 

The parties of the Music Recording Agreement are: 1. Good Kid, a Toronto-based musical group ("Artist") 2. Universal Music Group, a record label with license number 545345 ("Record Label") Both parties are referred to individually as "Parties" in the Agreement and collectively as "Parties." This means that the Artist and the Record Label are the two main participants in the agreement. 

JM-PR ( N = 1) 

The parties involved in the Music Recording Agreement are: * Good Kid, a Toronto-based musical group, represented by the artist. * Universal Music Group, a record label with license number 545345, represented by the record label.) This agreement is effective as of the 13th day of December 2021 and will last until the expiration of the agreement. The work under this agreement will begin on March 15, 2022, and will continue for the duration of the agreement. 

JM ( N = 16) 

Based on the provided Music Recording Agreement, the parties involved in the agreement are: 

1. Good Kid, a Toronto-based musical group (Artist). 2. Universal Music Group, a record label with license number 545345 (Record Label). 

The Agreement refers to the Artist and the Record Label as "Parties" and collectively as "Parties" throughout the document. Therefore, the parties to the Music Recording Agreement are: * Good Kid, a Toronto-based musical group (Artist) * Universal Music Group, a record label with license number 545345 (Record Label) 

The Agreement outlines the terms and conditions of the recording agreement between the Artist and the Record Label, including the commencement date, the duration of the agreement, and the scope of work. 

JM-PR ( N = 16) 

Based on the provided contract, the parties involved in the Music Recording Agreement are: 1. Good Kid, a Toronto-based musical group ("Artist") 2. Universal Music Group, a record label with license number 545345 ("Record Label") These two parties are involved in the agreement and are referred to individually as "Parties" and collectively as "Parties" throughout the document. 

Table 20: The response examples of JM and JM-PR by applying self-rejection on AlpacaEval. 11459